"<10.1002@anie.201912458.pdf>."
	
"Exposing unsaturated Cu1-O2 sites in nanoscale Cu-MOF for efficient electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution."
	
"O-coordinated W-Mo dual-atom catalyst for pH-universal electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution."
	
"Self-Adjusting Activity Induced by Intrinsic Reaction Intermediate in Fe-N-CSingle-Atom Catalysts."
	
"A sulfur-tethering synthesis strategy toward high-loading atomically dispersed noble metal catalyst."
	
"A sulfur-tethering synthesis strategy toward high-loading atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts."
	
Yang, H. B., et al. (2018). "Atomically dispersed Ni(i) as the active site for electrochemical CO2 reduction." Nature Energy 3(2): 140-147.
	
Bai, L., et al. (2019). "A Cobalt-Iron Double-Atom Catalyst for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction." J Am Chem Soc.
	Single-atom catalysts exhibit well-defined active sites and potentially maximum atomic efficiency. However, they are unsuitable for reactions that benefit from bimetallic promotion such as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in an alkaline medium. Here we show that a single-atom Co precatalyst can be in situ transformed into a Co-Fe double-atom catalyst for the OER. This catalyst exhibits one of the highest turnover frequencies among metal oxides. Electrochemical, microscopic, and spectroscopic data, including those from operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy, reveal a dimeric Co-Fe moiety as the active site of the catalyst. This work demonstrates double-atom catalysis as a promising approach for the development of defined and highly active OER catalysts.

Bai, S., et al. (2020). "Selective Ethanol Oxidation Reaction at the Rh-SnO2 Interface." Adv Mater: e2005767.
	Direct ethanol fuel cells (DEFCs) are regarded as an attractive power source with high energy density, bio-renewability, and convenient storage and transportation. However, the anodic reaction of DEFCs, that is, the ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR), suffers from poor efficiency due to the low selectivity to CO2 (C1 pathway) and high selectivity to CH3 COOH (C2 pathway). In this study, the selective EOR to CO2 can be achieved at the Rh-SnO2 interface in SnO2 -Rh nanosheets (NSs). The optimized catalyst of 0.2SnO2 -Rh NSs/C exhibits excellent alkaline EOR performance with a mass activity of 213.2 mA mgRh (-1) and a Faraday efficiency of 72.8% for the C1 pathway, which are 1.7 and 1.9 times higher than those of Rh NSs/C. Mechanism studies indicate that the strong synergy at the Rh-SnO2 interface significantly promotes the breaking of CC bond of C2 H5 OH to form CO2 , and facilitates oxidation of the poisonous intermediates ((*) CO and (*) CH3 ) to suppress the deactivation of the catalyst. This work not only provides a highly selective, active, and stable catalyst for the EOR, but also promotes fundamental research for the design of efficient catalysts via interface modification.

Cai, C., et al. (2020). "Ultrahigh Oxygen Evolution Reaction Activity Achieved Using Ir Single Atoms on Amorphous CoOx Nanosheets." ACS Catalysis: 123-130.
	
Cai, Y., et al. (2021). "Insights on forming N,O-coordinated Cu single-atom catalysts for electrochemical reduction CO2 to methane." Nat Commun 12(1): 586.
	Single-atom catalysts (SACs) are promising candidates to catalyze electrochemical CO2 reduction (ECR) due to maximized atomic utilization. However, products are usually limited to CO instead of hydrocarbons or oxygenates due to unfavorable high energy barrier for further electron transfer on synthesized single atom catalytic sites. Here we report a novel partial-carbonization strategy to modify the electronic structures of center atoms on SACs for lowering the overall endothermic energy of key intermediates. A carbon-dots-based SAC margined with unique CuN2O2 sites was synthesized for the first time. The introduction of oxygen ligands brings remarkably high Faradaic efficiency (78%) and selectivity (99% of ECR products) for electrochemical converting CO2 to CH4 with current density of 40 mA.cm(-2) in aqueous electrolytes, surpassing most reported SACs which stop at two-electron reduction. Theoretical calculations further revealed that the high selectivity and activity on CuN2O2 active sites are due to the proper elevated CH4 and H2 energy barrier and fine-tuned electronic structure of Cu active sites.

Chen, J., et al. (2019). "Redispersion of Mo-Based Catalysts and the Rational Design of Super Small-Sized Metallic Mo Species." ACS Catalysis: 5302-5307.
	
Chen, K., et al. (2020). "Iron phthalocyanine with coordination induced electronic localization to boost oxygen reduction reaction." Nat Commun 11(1): 4173.
	Iron phthalocyanine (FePc) is a promising non-precious catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Unfortunately, FePc with plane-symmetric FeN4 site usually exhibits an unsatisfactory ORR activity due to its poor O2 adsorption and activation. Here, we report an axial Fe-O coordination induced electronic localization strategy to improve its O2 adsorption, activation and thus the ORR performance. Theoretical calculations indicate that the Fe-O coordination evokes the electronic localization among the axial direction of O-FeN4 sites to enhance O2 adsorption and activation. To realize this speculation, FePc is coordinated with an oxidized carbon. Synchrotron X-ray absorption and Mossbauer spectra validate Fe-O coordination between FePc and carbon. The obtained catalyst exhibits fast kinetics for O2 adsorption and activation with an ultralow Tafel slope of 27.5 mV dec(-1) and a remarkable half-wave potential of 0.90 V. This work offers a new strategy to regulate catalytic sites for better performance.

Chen, M. X., et al. (2019). "Identification of catalytic sites for oxygen reduction in metal/nitrogen-doped carbons with encapsulated metal nanoparticles." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	The development of metal-N-C materials as efficient non-precious metal (NPM) catalysts for catalyzing oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) as alternatives to platinum is of significance for the practical implementation of proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). However, the high structural heterogeneity of metal-N-C materials that often consist of metal-N x sites and graphene-encapsulated metal nanoparticle simultaneously, as a result of their high-temperature synthesis method, makes it extremely challenging to identify the predominant active structure of metal-N-C catalysts for ORR. Here, we report a low-temperature NH 4 Cl-treatment strategy to efficiently etch out graphene-encapsulated nanoparticles from metal-N-C catalysts without destruction of co-existed atomically dispersed metal-N x sites. We observe a much enhanced catalytic activity upon selective removal of metallic nanoparticles from metal-N-C materials. Accordingly, we definitely elucidate the spectator role of graphene-encapsulated nanoparticles and the pivotal role of metal-N x sites in the metal-N-C materials for ORR in the acidic medium.

Chen, W., et al. (2017). "Rational Design of Single Molybdenum Atoms Anchored on N-Doped Carbon for Effective Hydrogen Evolution Reaction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 56(50): 16086-16090.
	The highly efficient electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) provides a promising pathway to resolve energy and environment problems. An electrocatalyst was designed with single Mo atoms (Mo-SAs) supported on N-doped carbon having outstanding HER performance. The structure of the catalyst was probed by aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC-STEM) and X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy, indicating the formation of Mo-SAs anchored with one nitrogen atom and two carbon atoms (Mo1 N1 C2 ). Importantly, the Mo1 N1 C2 catalyst displayed much more excellent activity compared with Mo2 C and MoN, and better stability than commercial Pt/C. Density functional theory (DFT) calculation revealed that the unique structure of Mo1 N1 C2 moiety played a crucial effect to improve the HER performance. This work opens up new opportunities for the preparation and application of highly active and stable Mo-based HER catalysts.

Chen, Y., et al. (2020). "Atomic-level modulation of electronic density of metal-organic frameworks-derived Co single-atom sites to enhance oxygen reduction performance." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Tuning the electronic structure of single-atom active sites via engineering atomic configuration is an effective strategy to boost oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), but still remains challenging because of the lack of rational guidance and effective methods. Here, we demonstrate the correlation between atomic configuration induced electronic density of single-atom Co active sites and ORR performance by combining density functional theory (DFT) calculations and electrochemical analysis. Guided by DFT calculations, we designed and synthesized a MOFs-derived Co single-atom catalyst with the optimal Co 1 -N 3 PS active moiety incorporated in hollow carbon polyhedron (Co 1 -N 3 PS/HC). As predicted, Co 1 -N 3 PS/HC exhibits outstanding alkaline ORR activity with a half-wave potential of 0.920 V and superior ORR kinetics with record-level kinetic current and ultralow Tafel slope of 31 mV dec -1 , exceeding the Pt/C and almost all non-precious ORR electrocatalysts. Even in more challenging acidic media, the ORR kinetics of Co 1 -N 3 PS/HC still surpasses that of Pt/C. This work offers an atomic-level insight into the relationship between electronic density of active site and catalytic property, promoting rational design of highly efficient catalysts.

Chen, Y., et al. (2021). "Atomic-Level Modulation of Electronic Density at Cobalt Single-Atom Sites Derived from Metal-Organic Frameworks: Enhanced Oxygen Reduction Performance." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 60(6): 3212-3221.
	Demonstrated here is the correlation between atomic configuration induced electronic density of single-atom Co active sites and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) performance by combining density-functional theory (DFT) calculations and electrochemical analysis. Guided by DFT calculations, a MOF-derived Co single-atom catalyst with the optimal Co1 -N3 PS active moiety incorporated in a hollow carbon polyhedron (Co1 -N3 PS/HC) was designed and synthesized. Co1 -N3 PS/HC exhibits outstanding alkaline ORR activity with a half-wave potential of 0.920 V and superior ORR kinetics with record-level kinetic current density and an ultralow Tafel slope of 31 mV dec(-1) , exceeding that of Pt/C and almost all non-precious ORR electrocatalysts. In acidic media the ORR kinetics of Co1 -N3 PS/HC still surpasses that of Pt/C. This work offers atomic-level insight into the relationship between electronic density of the active site and catalytic properties, promoting rational design of efficient catalysts.

Chen, Y., et al. (2018). "Enhanced oxygen reduction with single-atomic-site iron catalysts for a zinc-air battery and hydrogen-air fuel cell." Nat Commun 9(1): 5422.
	Efficient, durable and inexpensive electrocatalysts that accelerate sluggish oxygen reduction reaction kinetics and achieve high-performance are highly desirable. Here we develop a strategy to fabricate a catalyst comprised of single iron atomic sites supported on a nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur co-doped hollow carbon polyhedron from a metal-organic framework@polymer composite. The polymer-based coating facilitates the construction of a hollow structure via the Kirkendall effect and electronic modulation of an active metal center by long-range interaction with sulfur and phosphorus. Benefiting from structure functionalities and electronic control of a single-atom iron active center, the catalyst shows a remarkable performance with enhanced kinetics and activity for oxygen reduction in both alkaline and acid media. Moreover, the catalyst shows promise for substitution of expensive platinum to drive the cathodic oxygen reduction reaction in zinc-air batteries and hydrogen-air fuel cells.

Chen, Y., et al. (2018). "Atomic Fe Dispersed on N-Doped Carbon Hollow Nanospheres for High-Efficiency Electrocatalytic Oxygen Reduction." Adv Mater: e1806312.
	Exploration of high-efficiency, economical, and ultrastable electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) to substitute precious Pt is of great significance in electrochemical energy conversion devices. Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have sparked tremendous interest for their maximum atom-utilization efficiency and fascinating properties. Therefore, the development of effective synthetic methodology toward SACs becomes highly imperative yet still remains greatly challenging. Herein, a reliable SiO2 -templated strategy is elaborately designed to synthesize atomically dispersed Fe atoms anchored on N-doped carbon nanospheres (denoted as Fe-N-C HNSs) using the cheap and sustainable biomaterial of histidine (His) as the N and C precursor. By virtue of the numerous atomically dispersed Fe-N4 moieties and unique spherical hollow architecture, the as-fabricated Fe-N-C HNSs exhibit excellent ORR performance in alkaline medium with outstanding activity, high long-term stability, and superior tolerance to methanol crossover, exceeding the commercial Pt/C catalyst and most previously reported non-precious-metal catalysts. This present synthetic strategy will provide new inspiration to the fabrication of various high-efficiency single-atom catalysts for diverse applications.

Chen, Z., et al. (2021). "Fe1N4–O1 site with axial Fe–O coordination for highly selective CO2 reduction over a wide potential range." Energy & Environmental Science.
	
Cheng, H.-Y., et al. (2013). "Adsorption of a single Pt atom on polyaromatic hydrocarbons from first-principle calculations." Chemical Physics Letters 575: 76-80.
	
Cheng, Y., et al. (2019). "Iron Single Atoms on Graphene as Nonprecious Metal Catalysts for High-Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells." Advanced Science: 1802066.
	
Choi, C. H., et al. (2016). "Tuning selectivity of electrochemical reactions by atomically dispersed platinum catalyst." Nat Commun 7: 10922.
	Maximum atom efficiency as well as distinct chemoselectivity is expected for electrocatalysis on atomically dispersed (or single site) metal centres, but its realization remains challenging so far, because carbon, as the most widely used electrocatalyst support, cannot effectively stabilize them. Here we report that a sulfur-doped zeolite-templated carbon, simultaneously exhibiting large sulfur content (17 wt% S), as well as a unique carbon structure (that is, highly curved three-dimensional networks of graphene nanoribbons), can stabilize a relatively high loading of platinum (5 wt%) in the form of highly dispersed species including site isolated atoms. In the oxygen reduction reaction, this catalyst does not follow a conventional four-electron pathway producing H2O, but selectively produces H2O2 even over extended times without significant degradation of the activity. Thus, this approach constitutes a potentially promising route for producing important fine chemical H2O2, and also offers opportunities for tuning the selectivity of other electrochemical reactions on various metal catalysts.

Deng, C., et al. (2019). "Spherical Murray-Type Assembly of Co-N-C Nanoparticles as a High-Performance Trifunctional Electrocatalyst." ACS Appl Mater Interfaces.
	Future renewable energy conversion requires advanced electrocatalysis technologies for hydrogen production, fuel cells, and metal-air batteries. Highly efficient trifunctional nonprecious electrocatalysts are a critical precious metal replacement for the economically viable electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction and water splitting, both of which are a triphase electrode process. Electrocatalysts with a refined porous structure and active composition beneficial for three-phase reactions are broadly pursued. Herein, a highly promising trifunctional spherical Murray assembly of Co-N-C nanoparticles was derived from low-cost Prussian blue analogues for the oxygen reduction reaction and water splitting. The Murray-type architecture with a tunable porous hierarchy for efficient mass transfer and the combination of a Co-N-C active composition are key for the improved electrocatalytic performance. Acid-leaching produced an optimized Murray-type durable and methanol-tolerant Co-N-C electrocatalyst that achieved an onset potential of 0.94 V [vs reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)] and a half wave potential of 0.84 V (vs RHE) as well as a large diffusion-limited current density of 5.7 mA cm(-2) for the oxygen reduction reaction, which is comparable to Pt/C. In addition, it displayed low onset overpotentials of approximately 150 and approximately 350 mV corresponding to the hydrogen evolution reaction and oxygen evolution reaction, respectively, highlighting its great potential to be used in overall water splitting with a total splitting voltage of 1.73 V. This work highlights the importance of Murray-type electrocatalysts for multiphase energy-related reactions.

Deng, J., et al. (2015). "Triggering the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of the inert two-dimensional MoS2 surface via single-atom metal doping." Energy & Environmental Science 8(5): 1594-1601.
	
Ding, W.-C., et al. (2014). "Single Pd Atom Embedded in CeO2(111) for NO Reduction with CO: A First-Principles Study." The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 118(23): 12216-12223.
	
Fang, Y., et al. (2019). "In situ growth of graphdiyne based heterostructure: Toward efficient overall water splitting." Nano Energy 59: 591-597.
	
Gan, G., et al. (2020). "Active Sites in Single-Atom Fe-Nx-C Nanosheets for Selective Electrochemical Dechlorination of 1,2-Dichloroethane to Ethylene." Acs Nano.
	Electrochemical dechlorination of 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) is one of the prospective and economic strategies for the preparation of high-value ethylene. However, the exploration of advanced electrocatalysts with high reactivity and selectivity and the identification of their active sites are still a challenge. Herein, a single-atom (SA) Fe-Nx-C nanosheet with the presence of a highly efficient Fe-N4 coordination pattern is reported. The as-prepared single-atom electrocatalyst exhibits a higher reactivity and ethylene selectivity for DCE dechlorination reaction than those of the commercially adopted 20% Pt-C catalyst. By a combination of experiments and theoretical calculations, the atomically dispersed Fe center in the Fe-N4 structure was unveiled to be the dominating active site for electrochemical production of ethylene. Our work would offer an approach for the rational development of SA materials and supply crucial insight into the mechanism of ethylene production through the DCE dechlorination reaction.

Gao, C., et al. (2018). "Heterogeneous Single-Atom Catalyst for Visible-Light-Driven High-Turnover CO2 Reduction: The Role of Electron Transfer." Adv Mater.
	Visible-light-driven conversion of CO2 into chemical fuels is an intriguing approach to address the energy and environmental challenges. In principle, light harvesting and catalytic reactions can be both optimized by combining the merits of homogeneous and heterogeneous photocatalysts; however, the efficiency of charge transfer between light absorbers and catalytic sites is often too low to limit the overall photocatalytic performance. In this communication, it is reported that the single-atom Co sites coordinated on the partially oxidized graphene nanosheets can serve as a highly active and durable heterogeneous catalyst for CO2 conversion, wherein the graphene bridges homogeneous light absorbers with single-atom catalytic sites for the efficient transfer of photoexcited electrons. As a result, the turnover number for CO production reaches a high value of 678 with an unprecedented turnover frequency of 3.77 min(-1) , superior to those obtained with the state-of-the-art heterogeneous photocatalysts. This work provides fresh insights into the design of catalytic sites toward photocatalytic CO2 conversion from the angle of single-atom catalysis and highlights the role of charge kinetics in bridging the gap between heterogeneous and homogeneous photocatalysts.

Gao, R., et al. (2021). "Pt/Fe2O3 with Pt–Fe pair sites as a catalyst for oxygen reduction with ultralow Pt loading." Nature Energy.
	
Ghosh, T. K. and N. N. Nair (2013). "Rh1/γ-Al2O3Single-Atom Catalysis of O2Activation and CO Oxidation: Mechanism, Effects of Hydration, Oxidation State, and Cluster Size." ChemCatChem 5(7): 1811-1821.
	
Gong, L., et al. (2020). "Bridge Bonded Oxygen Ligands between Approximated FeN4 Sites Confer the Catalysts with High ORR Performance." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	The applications of the most promising Fe-N-C catalysts are prohibited by their limited intrinsic activity. Manipulating the Fe energy level through anchoring electron withdrawing ligands is found effective in boosting the catalytic performance. However, such regulation remains elusive as the ligands are only uncontrollably introduced owning to their energetically instable nature. Here we report a rational manipulation strategy for introducing axial bonded O to the Fe sites, attained through hexa-coordinating Fe with oxygen functional groups in the precursor. Moreover, the O modifier is stabilized by forming the Fe-O-Fe bridge bond, with the approximation of two FeN 4 sites. The energy level modulation thus created confers the sites with an intrinsic activity over 10 times higher than the normal FeN 4 site. Our finding opens up a novel strategy to manage coordination environment at atomic scale towards high activity ORR catalysts.

Gong, W., et al. (2019). "Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanotube Confined Co-Nx Sites for Selective Hydrogenation of Biomass-Derived Compounds." Adv Mater 31(11): e1808341.
	Biomass is the most abundant renewable resource on earth and developing high-performance nonprecious selective hydrogenation (SH) catalysts will enable the use of biomass to replace rapidly diminishing fossil resources. This work utilizes ZIF-67-derived nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes to confine Co nanoparticles (NPs) with Co-Nx active sites as a high-performance SH catalyst. The confined Co NPs with Co-Nx exhibit excellent catalytic activity, selectivity, and stability toward a wide range of biomass-derived compounds. Such active sites can selectively hydrogenate aldehyde, ketone, carboxyl, and nitro groups of biomass-derived compounds into value-added fine chemicals with 100% selectivity. The reported approach could be adopted to create other forms of catalytically active sites from other nonprecious metals.

Gong, W., et al. (2019). "Liberating N-CNTs Confined Highly Dispersed CoNx Sites for Selective Hydrogenation of Quinolines." Adv Mater: e1906051.
	Selective hydrogenation of quinoline and its derivatives is an important means to produce corresponding 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinolines for a wide spectrum of applications. A facile and efficient "laser irradiation in liquid" technique to liberate the inaccessible highly dispersed CoNx active sites confined inside N-doped carbon nanotubes is demonstrated. The liberated CoNx sites possess generic catalytic activities toward selective hydrogenation of quinoline and its hydroxyl, methyl, and halogen substituted derivatives into corresponding 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinolines with almost 100% conversion efficiency and selectivity. This laser irradiation treatment approach should be widely applicable to unlock the catalytic powers of inaccessible catalytic active sites confined by other materials.

Gu, J., et al. (2019). "Atomically dispersed Fe(3+) sites catalyze efficient CO2 electroreduction to CO." Science 364(6445): 1091-1094.
	Currently, the most active electrocatalysts for the conversion of CO2 to CO are gold-based nanomaterials, whereas non-precious metal catalysts have shown low to modest activity. Here, we report a catalyst of dispersed single-atom iron sites that produces CO at an overpotential as low as 80 millivolts. Partial current density reaches 94 milliamperes per square centimeter at an overpotential of 340 millivolts. Operando x-ray absorption spectroscopy revealed the active sites to be discrete Fe(3+) ions, coordinated to pyrrolic nitrogen (N) atoms of the N-doped carbon support, that maintain their +3 oxidation state during electrocatalysis, probably through electronic coupling to the conductive carbon support. Electrochemical data suggest that the Fe(3+) sites derive their superior activity from faster CO2 adsorption and weaker CO absorption than that of conventional Fe(2+) sites.

Gu, W., et al. (2019). "Single-Atom Iron Boosts Electrochemiluminescence." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	In traditional luminol-H2O2 electrochemiluminescence (ECL) sensing platform, H2O2 suffers from the self-decomposition of at room temperature, inevitably leading to the difficulty for quantitative analysis. In this work, we first adopt iron single-atom catalysts (Fe-N-C SACs) as an advanced coreactant accelerator to directly reduce the dissolved oxygen (O2) into reactive oxygen species (ROS). Owing to the unique electronic structure and catalytic activity of Fe-N-C SACs, a large amount of ROS could be efficiently produced, which will react with the luminol anion radical and significantly amplify the luminol ECL emission. Under the optimal conditions, a Fe-N-C SACs-luminol ECL sensor for antioxidant capacity measurement was developed with a good linear relationship ranged from 0.8 muM to 1.0 mM of Trolox. This typical single-atom catalyst sheds light on boosting the ECL emission of the luminol-dissolved O2 sensing platform, providing a new pathway for further research of a luminol-based ECL system.

Gu, Y., et al. (2021). "Atomic Pt Embedded in BNC Nanotubes for Enhanced Electrochemical Ozone Production via an Oxygen Intermediate-Rich Local Environment." ACS Catalysis: 5438-5451.
	
Guan, J., et al. (2018). "Water oxidation on a mononuclear manganese heterogeneous catalyst." Nature Catalysis.
	
Guo, Z., et al. (2019). "Single-atom Mn-N4 Sites Catalyzed Peroxone Reaction for Efficient Production of Hydroxyl Radicals under Acidic Solution." J Am Chem Soc.
	The peroxone reaction between O3 and H2O2 has been deemed a promising technology to resolve the increasingly serious water pollution problem by virtue of the generation of super-active hydroxyl radicals (*OH), but it suffers greatly from extremely limited reaction rate con-stant under acidic conditions (ca. less than 0.1 M-1s-1 at pH 3). This paper describes a heterogeneous catalyst comprised of single Mn atoms anchored on graphitic carbon nitride, which effectively overcome such the drawback by altering the reaction pathway and, thus, dramatically promotes *OH generation in acid solution. Combined experimental and theoretical studies demonstrate Mn-N4 as the catalytically active sites. A distinctive catalytic pathway involving HO2* formation by activation of H2O2 is found, which gets rid of the restriction of HO2- as the essential initiator in conventional peroxone reaction. This work offer a new pathway of using a low-cost and easily accessible single atom catalyst (SAC), and could inspire more catalytic oxidation strategies.

Han, A., et al. (2019). "Isolating contiguous Pt atoms and forming Pt-Zn intermetallic nanoparticles to regulate selectivity in 4-nitrophenylacetylene hydrogenation." Nat Commun 10(1): 3787.
	Noble metals play a momentous role in heterogeneous catalysis but still face a huge challenge in selectivity control. Herein, we report isolating contiguous Pt atoms and forming Pt-Zn intermetallic nanoparticles as an effective strategy to optimize the selectivity of Pt catalysts. Contiguous Pt atoms are isolated into single atoms and Pt-Zn intermetallic nanoparticles are formed which are supported on hollow nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (PtZn/HNCNT), as confirmed by aberration-corrected high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and X-ray absorption spectrometry measurements. Interestingly, this PtZn/HNCNT catalyst promotes the hydrogenation of 4-nitrophenylacetylene to 4-aminophenylacetylene with a much higher conversion ( > 99%) and selectivity (99%) than the comparison samples with Pt isolated-single-atomic-sites (Pt/HNCNT) and Pt nanoparticles (Pt/CN). Further density functional theory (DFT) calculations disclose that the positive Zn atoms assist the adsorption of nitro group and Pt-Zn intermetallic nanoparticles facilitate the hydrogenation on nitro group kinetically.

Han, G., et al. (2019). "High loading single-atom Cu dispersed on graphene for efficient oxygen reduction reaction." Nano Energy 66: 104088.
	
Han, L., et al. (2018). "Atomically dispersed Mo catalysts for high-efficiency ambient N2 fixation." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	NH3 synthesis by electrocatalytic N2 reduction reaction (NRR) under ambient conditions is an appealing alternative to the industrial method that requires high temperature and pressure. Herein, we report single Mo atoms anchored to N-doped porous carbon, which works as a cost-effective catalyst for NRR. Benefiting from the optimally high density of active sites and hierarchically porous carbon frameworks, this catalyst achieves a high NH3 yield rate (34.0 +/- 3.6 mugNH3 h-1 mgcat.-1) and a high Faradaic efficiency (14.6 +/- 1.6 %) in 0.1 M KOH at room temperature. These are considerably higher values compared with those for previously reported non-precious-metal electrocatalysts. Moreover, this catalyst displays no obvious current drop during a 50,000-second NRR. Similarly, high activity and durability are also achieved in 0.1 M HCl by the catalyst. This work may provide a promising lead for designing efficient and robust single-atom non-precious-metal catalysts toward electrolytic NRR.

Han, L., et al. (2020). "Modulating Single-Atom Palladium Sites with Copper for Enhanced Ambient Ammonia Electrosynthesis." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	The electrochemical reduction of N2 to NH3 is emerging as a promising alternative for sustainable and distributed production of NH3 . However, the development has been impeded by difficulties in N2 adsorption, protonation of *NN, and inhibition of competing hydrogen evolution. To address the issues, we design a catalyst with diatomic Pd-Cu sites on N-doped carbon by modulation of single-atom Pd sites with Cu. The introduction of Cu not only shifts the partial density of states of Pd toward the Fermi level but also promotes the d-2pi* coupling between Pd and adsorbed N2 , leading to enhanced chemisorption and activated protonation of N2 , and suppressed hydrogen evolution. As a result, the catalyst achieves a high Faradaic efficiency of 24.8+/-0.8 % and a desirable NH3 yield rate of 69.2+/-2.5 mug h(-1) mgcat. (-1) , far outperforming the individual single-atom Pd catalyst. This work paves a pathway of engineering single-atom-based electrocatalysts for enhanced ammonia electrosynthesis.

Han, S.-G., et al. (2020). "Fluorine-tuned single-atom catalysts with dense surface Ni-N4 sites on ultrathin carbon nanosheets for efficient CO2 electroreduction." Applied Catalysis B: Environmental.
	
Han, X., et al. (2019). "Atomically Dispersed Binary Co-Ni Sites in Nitrogen-Doped Hollow Carbon Nanocubes for Reversible Oxygen Reduction and Evolution." Adv Mater: e1905622.
	With the inspiration of developing bifunctional electrode materials for reversible oxygen electrocatalysis, one strategy of heteroatom doping is proposed to fabricate dual metal single-atom catalysts. However, the identification and mechanism functions of polynary single-atom structures remain elusive. Atomically dispersed binary Co-Ni sites embedded in N-doped hollow carbon nanocubes (denoted as CoNi-SAs/NC) are synthesized via proposed pyrolysis of dopamine-coated metal-organic frameworks. The atomically isolated bimetallic configuration in CoNi-SAs/NC is identified by combining microscopic and spectroscopic techniques. When employing as oxygen electrocatalysts in alkaline medium, the resultant CoNi-SAs/NC hybrid manifests outstanding catalytic performance for bifunctional oxygen reduction/evolution reactions, boosting the realistic rechargeable zinc-air batteries with high efficiency, low overpotential, and robust reversibility, superior to other counterparts and state-of-the-art precious-metal catalysts. Theoretical computations based on density functional theory demonstrate that the homogenously dispersed single atoms and the synergistic effect of neighboring Co-Ni dual metal center can optimize the adsorption/desorption features and decrease the overall reaction barriers, eventually promoting the reversible oxygen electrocatalysis. This work not only sheds light on the controlled synthesis of atomically isolated advanced materials, but also provides deeper understanding on the structure-performance relationships of nanocatalysts with multiple active sites for various catalytic applications.

He, Y., et al. (2019). "Highly active atomically dispersed CoN4 fuel cell cathode catalysts derived from surfactant-assisted MOFs: carbon-shell confinement strategy." Energy & Environmental Science.
	
Hooe, S. L., et al. (2019). "Highly Efficient Electrocatalytic Reduction of CO2 to CO by a Molecular Chromium Complex." ACS Catalysis: 1146-1151.
	
Hou, C. C., et al. (2020). "Single-Atom Iron Catalysts on Overhang-Eave Carbon Cages for High-Performance Oxygen Reduction Reaction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Single-atom catalysts have drawn great attention, especially in electrocatalysis. However, most of previous works focus on the enhanced catalytic properties via improving metal loading. Engineering morphologies of catalysts to facilitate mass transport through catalyst layers, thus increasing the utilization of each active site, is regarded as an appealing way for enhanced performance. Herein, we design an overhang-eave structure decorated with isolated single-atom iron sites via a silica-mediated MOF-templated approach for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalysis. This catalyst demonstrates superior ORR performance in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes, comparable to the state-of-the-art Pt/C catalyst and superior to most precious-metal-free catalysts reported to date. This activity originates from its edge-rich structure, having more three-phase boundaries with enhanced mass transport of reactants to accessible single-atom iron sites (increasing the utilization of active sites), which verifies the practicability of such a synthetic approach.

Hu, Y., et al. (2020). "Single Ru Atoms Stabilized by Hybrid Amorphous/Crystalline FeCoNi Layered Double Hydroxide for Ultraefficient Oxygen Evolution." Advanced Energy Materials.
	
Huang, L., et al. (2021). "Interfacial Electron Engineering of Palladium and Molybdenum Carbide for Highly Efficient Oxygen Reduction." J Am Chem Soc.
	Interfacial electron engineering between noble metal and transition metal carbide is identified as a powerful strategy to improve the intrinsic activity of electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). However, this short-range effect and the huge structural differences make it a significant challenge to obtain the desired electrocatalyst with atomically thin noble metal layers. Here, we demonstrated the combinatorial strategies to fabricate the heterostructure electrocatalyst of Mo2C-coupled Pd atomic layers (AL-Pd/Mo2C) by precise control of metal-organic framework confinement and covalent interaction. Both atomic characterizations and density functional theory calculations uncovered that the strong electron effect imposed on Pd atomic layers has intensively regulated the electronic structures and d-band center and then optimized the reaction kinetics. Remarkably, AL-Pd/Mo2C showed the highest ORR electrochemical activity and stability, which delivered a mass activity of 2.055 A mgPd(-1) at 0.9 V, which is 22.1, 36.1, and 80.3 times higher than Pt/C, Pd/C, and Pd nanoparticles, respectively. The present work has developed a novel approach for atomically noble metal catalysts and provides new insights into interfacial electron regulation.

Huang, P., et al. (2019). "Single Mo atom realized enhanced CO2 electro-reduction into formate on N-doped graphene." Nano Energy.
	
Huang, Q., et al. (2019). "Disclosing CO2 Activation Mechanism by Hydroxyl-Induced Crystalline Structure Transformation in Electrocatalytic Process." Matter.
	
Jeong, H.-Y., et al. (2019). "Achieving highly efficient CO2 to CO electroreduction exceeding 300 mA/cm2 with single-atom nickel electrocatalysts." Journal of Materials Chemistry A.
	
Ji, D., et al. (2019). "Atomically Transition Metals on Self-Supported Porous Carbon Flake Arrays as Binder-Free Air Cathode for Wearable Zinc−Air Batteries." Advanced Materials: 1808267.
	
Ji, S., et al. (2021). "Matching the kinetics of natural enzymes with a single-atom iron nanozyme." Nature Catalysis.
	
Jia, H.-P., et al. (2006). "Synthesis, Structure and Magnetism of Metal-Organic Framework Materials with Doubly Pillared Layers." European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry 2006(21): 4264-4270.
	
Jiang, R., et al. (2018). "Edge-Site Engineering of Atomically Dispersed Fe-N4 by Selective C-N Bond Cleavage for Enhanced Oxygen Reduction Reaction Activities." J Am Chem Soc.
	Single-atom metal-nitrogen-carbon (M-N-C) catalysts have sparked intense interests, but the catalytic contribution of N-bonding environment neighboring M-N4 sites lacks attention. Herein, a series of Fe-N-C nanoarchitectures have been prepared, which confer adjustable numbers of atomically dispersed Fe-N4 sites, tunable hierarchical micro-mesoporous structures and intensified exposure of interior active sites. The optimization between Fe-N4 single sites and carbon matrix delivers superior oxygen reduction reaction activity (half-wave potential of 0.915 V vs RHE in alkaline medium) with remarkable stability and high atom-utilization efficiency (almost 10-fold enhancement). Both experiments and theoretical calculations verified the selective C-N bond cleavage adjacent to Fe center induced by porosity engineering could form edge-hosted Fe-N4 moieties, and therefore lower the overall oxygen reduction reaction barriers comparing to intact atomic configuration. These findings provide a new pathway for the integrated engineering of geometric and electronic structures of single-atom materials to improve their catalytic performance.

Jiang, W. J., et al. (2016). "Understanding the High Activity of Fe-N-C Electrocatalysts in Oxygen Reduction: Fe/Fe3C Nanoparticles Boost the Activity of Fe-N(x)." J Am Chem Soc 138(10): 3570-3578.
	Understanding the origin of high activity of Fe-N-C electrocatalysts in oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is critical but still challenging for developing efficient sustainable nonprecious metal catalysts in fuel cells and metal-air batteries. Herein, we developed a new highly active Fe-N-C ORR catalyst containing Fe-N(x) coordination sites and Fe/Fe3C nanocrystals (Fe@C-FeNC), and revealed the origin of its activity by intensively investigating the composition and the structure of the catalyst and their correlations with the electrochemical performance. The detailed analyses unambiguously confirmed the coexistence of Fe/Fe3C nanocrystals and Fe-N(x) in the best catalyst. A series of designed experiments disclosed that (1) N-doped carbon substrate, Fe/Fe3C nanocrystals or Fe-N(x) themselves did not deliver the high activity; (2) the catalysts with both Fe/Fe3C nanocrystals and Fe-N(x) exhibited the high activity; (3) the higher content of Fe-N(x) gave the higher activity; (4) the removal of Fe/Fe3C nanocrystals severely degraded the activity; (5) the blocking of Fe-N(x) downgraded the activity and the recovery of the blocked Fe-N(x) recovered the activity. These facts supported that the high ORR activity of the Fe@C-FeNC electrocatalysts should be ascribed to that Fe/Fe3C nanocrystals boost the activity of Fe-N(x). The coexistence of high content of Fe-N(x) and sufficient metallic iron nanoparticles is essential for the high ORR activity. DFT calculation corroborated this conclusion by indicating that the interaction between metallic iron and Fe-N4 coordination structure favored the adsorption of oxygen molecule. These new findings open an avenue for the rational design and bottom-up synthesis of low-cost highly active ORR electrocatalysts.

Jiang, Z., et al. (2019). "Atomic interface effect of a single atom copper catalyst for enhanced oxygen reduction reactions." Energy & Environmental Science.
	
Jiang, Z., et al. (2020). "Discovery of Main Group Single Sb-N4 Active Sites for CO2 Electroreduction to Formate with High Efficiency." Energy & Environmental Science.
	
Jiao, L., et al. (2020). "Nanocasting SiO2 into metal-organic frameworks imparts dual protection to high-loading Fe single-atom electrocatalysts." Nat Commun 11(1): 2831.
	Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have sparked broad interest recently while the low metal loading poses a big challenge for further applications. Herein, a dual protection strategy has been developed to give high-content SACs by nanocasting SiO2 into porphyrinic metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). The pyrolysis of SiO2@MOF composite affords single-atom Fe implanted N-doped porous carbon (FeSA-N-C) with high Fe loading (3.46 wt%). The spatial isolation of Fe atoms centered in porphyrin linkers of MOF sets the first protective barrier to inhibit the Fe agglomeration during pyrolysis. The SiO2 in MOF provides additional protection by creating thermally stable FeN4/SiO2 interfaces. Thanks to the high-density FeSA sites, FeSA-N-C demonstrates excellent oxygen reduction performance in both alkaline and acidic medias. Meanwhile, FeSA-N-C also exhibits encouraging performance in proton exchange membrane fuel cell, demonstrating great potential for practical application. More far-reaching, this work grants a general synthetic methodology toward high-content SACs (such as FeSA, CoSA, NiSA).

Jin, Z., et al. (2021). "Understanding the inter-site distance effect in single-atom catalysts for oxygen electroreduction." Nature Catalysis 4(7): 615-622.
	
Jung, E., et al. (2020). "Atomic-level tuning of Co-N-C catalyst for high-performance electrochemical H2O2 production." Nat Mater.
	Despite the growing demand for hydrogen peroxide it is almost exclusively manufactured by the energy-intensive anthraquinone process. Alternatively, H2O2 can be produced electrochemically via the two-electron oxygen reduction reaction, although the performance of the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts is insufficient to meet the demands for industrialization. Interestingly, guided by first-principles calculations, we found that the catalytic properties of the Co-N4 moiety can be tailored by fine-tuning its surrounding atomic configuration to resemble the structure-dependent catalytic properties of metalloenzymes. Using this principle, we designed and synthesized a single-atom electrocatalyst that comprises an optimized Co-N4 moiety incorporated in nitrogen-doped graphene for H2O2 production and exhibits a kinetic current density of 2.8 mA cm(-2) (at 0.65 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode) and a mass activity of 155 A g(-1) (at 0.65 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode) with negligible activity loss over 110 hours.

Karjule, N., et al. (2020). "Highly Efficient Polymeric Carbon Nitride Photoanode with Excellent Electron Diffusion Length and Hole Extraction Properties." Nano Lett 20(6): 4618-4624.
	Polymeric carbon nitride (CN) has emerged as a promising semiconductor in photoanodes for photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) owing to its suitable electronic structure, tunable band gap, high stability, and low price. However, the poor electron diffusion within the CN layer and hole extraction to the solution still limit its applicability in PECs. Here, we report the fabrication of a CN photoanode with excellent electron diffusion length and remarkable hole extraction properties by careful design of its electronic interfaces. We combine complementary synthetic approaches to grow tightly packed CN layers forming a type-II heterojunction, which results in a CN photoanode with excellent charge separation, high electronic conductivity, and remarkable hole extraction efficiency. The optimized CN photoanode displays excellent PEC performance, reaching up to 270 muA cm(-2) in a 0.1 M KOH solution at 1.23 V vs RHE, extremely low onset potential ( approximately 0.0012 V), and long-term stability up to 18 h.

Kim, O. H., et al. (2013). "Ordered macroporous platinum electrode and enhanced mass transfer in fuel cells using inverse opal structure." Nat Commun 4: 2473.
	Three-dimensional, ordered macroporous materials such as inverse opal structures are attractive materials for various applications in electrochemical devices because of the benefits derived from their periodic structures: relatively large surface areas, large voidage, low tortuosity and interconnected macropores. However, a direct application of an inverse opal structure in membrane electrode assemblies has been considered impractical because of the limitations in fabrication routes including an unsuitable substrate. Here we report the demonstration of a single cell that maintains an inverse opal structure entirely within a membrane electrode assembly. Compared with the conventional catalyst slurry, an ink-based assembly, this modified assembly has a robust and integrated configuration of catalyst layers; therefore, the loss of catalyst particles can be minimized. Furthermore, the inverse-opal-structure electrode maintains an effective porosity, an enhanced performance, as well as an improved mass transfer and more effective water management, owing to its morphological advantages.

Kou, Z., et al. (2019). "Cage-confinement pyrolysis route to size-controlled molybdenum-based oxygen electrode catalysts: From isolated atoms to clusters and nanoparticles." Nano Energy: 104288.
	
Kuang, P., et al. (2021). "Pt Single Atoms Supported on N-Doped Mesoporous Hollow Carbon Spheres with Enhanced Electrocatalytic H2 -Evolution Activity." Adv Mater: e2008599.
	The electronic metal-support interaction (EMSI) plays a crucial role in catalysis as it can induce electron transfer between metal and support, modulate the electronic state of the supported metal, and optimize the reduction of intermediate species. In this work, the tailoring of electronic structure of Pt single atoms supported on N-doped mesoporous hollow carbon spheres (Pt1 /NMHCS) via strong EMSI engineering is reported. The Pt1 /NMHCS composite is much more active and stable than the nanoparticle (PtNP ) counterpart and commercial 20 wt% Pt/C for catalyzing the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), exhibiting a low overpotential of 40 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm(-2) , a high mass activity of 2.07 A mg(-1) Pt at 50 mV overpotential, a large turnover frequency of 20.18 s(-1) at 300 mV overpotential, and outstanding durability in acidic electrolyte. Detailed spectroscopic characterizations and theoretical simulations reveal that the strong EMSI effect in a unique N1 -Pt1 -C2 coordination structure significantly tailors the electronic structure of Pt 5d states, resulting in promoted reduction of adsorbed proton, facilitated H-H coupling, and thus Pt-like HER activity. This work provides a constructive route for precisely designing single-Pt-atom-based robust electrocatalysts with high HER activity and durability.

Kumar, A., et al. (2021). "Moving beyond bimetallic-alloy to single-atom dimer atomic-interface for all-pH hydrogen evolution." Nat Commun 12(1): 6766.
	Single-atom-catalysts (SACs) afford a fascinating activity with respect to other nanomaterials for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), yet the simplicity of single-atom center limits its further modification and utilization. Obtaining bimetallic single-atom-dimer (SAD) structures can reform the electronic structure of SACs with added atomic-level synergistic effect, further improving HER kinetics beyond SACs. However, the synthesis and identification of such SAD structure remains conceptually challenging. Herein, systematic first-principle screening reveals that the synergistic interaction at the NiCo-SAD atomic interface can upshift the d-band center, thereby, facilitate rapid water-dissociation and optimal proton adsorption, accelerating alkaline/acidic HER kinetics. Inspired by theoretical predictions, we develop a facile strategy to obtain NiCo-SAD on N-doped carbon (NiCo-SAD-NC) via in-situ trapping of metal ions followed by pyrolysis with precisely controlled N-moieties. X-ray absorption spectroscopy indicates the emergence of Ni-Co coordination at the atomic-level. The obtained NiCo-SAD-NC exhibits exceptional pH-universal HER-activity, demanding only 54.7 and 61 mV overpotentials at -10 mA cm(-2) in acidic and alkaline media, respectively. This work provides a facile synthetic strategy for SAD catalysts and sheds light on the fundamentals of structure-activity relationships for future applications.

Kyriakou, G., et al. (2012). "Isolated metal atom geometries as a strategy for selective heterogeneous hydrogenations." Science 335(6073): 1209-1212.
	Facile dissociation of reactants and weak binding of intermediates are key requirements for efficient and selective catalysis. However, these two variables are intimately linked in a way that does not generally allow the optimization of both properties simultaneously. By using desorption measurements in combination with high-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy, we show that individual, isolated Pd atoms in a Cu surface substantially lower the energy barrier to both hydrogen uptake on and subsequent desorption from the Cu metal surface. This facile hydrogen dissociation at Pd atom sites and weak binding to Cu allow for very selective hydrogenation of styrene and acetylene as compared with pure Cu or Pd metal alone.

Lai, W. H., et al. (2019). "General pi-Electron-Assisted Strategy for Ir, Pt, Ru, Pd, Fe, Ni Single-Atom Electrocatalysts with Bifunctional Active Sites for Highly Efficient Water Splitting." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Both the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) are crucial to water splitting, but require alternative active sites. Now, a general pi-electron-assisted strategy to anchor single-atom sites (M=Ir, Pt, Ru, Pd, Fe, Ni) on a heterogeneous support is reported. The M atoms can simultaneously anchor on two distinct domains of the hybrid support, four-fold N/C atoms (M@NC), and centers of Co octahedra (M@Co), which are expected to serve as bifunctional electrocatalysts towards the HER and the OER. The Ir catalyst exhibits the best water-splitting performance, showing a low applied potential of 1.603 V to achieve 10 mA cm(-2) in 1.0 m KOH solution with cycling over 5 h. DFT calculations indicate that the Ir@Co (Ir) sites can accelerate the OER, while the Ir@NC3 sites are responsible for the enhanced HER, clarifying the unprecedented performance of this bifunctional catalyst towards full water splitting.

Lai, W.-H., et al. (2019). "The Quasi-Pt-Allotrope Catalyst: Hollow PtCo@single-Atom Pt1
 on Nitrogen-Doped Carbon toward Superior Oxygen Reduction." Advanced Functional Materials: 1807340.
	
Lei, Y., et al. (2020). "Realizing the atomic active center for hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Hydrogen (H 2 ) evolution from water using renewable electrical energy is quite attractive. Though Pt/C exhibits the highest H 2 evolution reaction (HER) catalytic activity, the scarce supply and high cost limit its large-scale application. Atomic active centers in single-atom catalysts, single-atom alloys, dual-atom site catalysts, exhibit maximum atomic efficiency, unique structure and exceptional activity for HER. It is known that the interactions between well-defined active sites and supports change the electronic transfer, dramatically accelerating the reaction kinetics. However, the deep and comprehensive cognition of the active center at atomic scale is urgent. In this review, first, the atomic HER active centers study tool box is suggested. Then we review and discuss the active sites with different coordination configurations for HER. The single metal-, dual metal- as well as non-metal active center towards HER at atomic scale are deeply analyzed. Finally, future research perspectives are proposed. This review aims to shine light on the profound grasp and proof-of-concept design of atomic active center for HER.

Li, B. Q., et al. (2019). "Electrosynthesis of Hydrogen Peroxide Synergistically Catalyzed by Atomic Co-Nx -C Sites and Oxygen Functional Groups in Noble-Metal-Free Electrocatalysts." Adv Mater: e1808173.
	Hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) is a green oxidizer widely involved in a vast number of chemical reactions. Electrochemical reduction of oxygen to H2 O2 constitutes an environmentally friendly synthetic route. However, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is kinetically sluggish and undesired water serves as the main product on most electrocatalysts. Therefore, electrocatalysts with high reactivity and selectivity are highly required for H2 O2 electrosynthesis. In this work, a synergistic strategy is proposed for the preparation of H2 O2 electrocatalysts with high ORR reactivity and high H2 O2 selectivity. A Co-Nx -C site and oxygen functional group comodified carbon-based electrocatalyst (named as Co-POC-O) is synthesized. The Co-POC-O electrocatalyst exhibits excellent catalytic performance for H2 O2 electrosynthesis in O2 -saturated 0.10 m KOH with a high selectivity over 80% as well as very high reactivity with an ORR potential at 1 mA cm(-2) of 0.79 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Further mechanism study identifies that the Co-Nx -C sites and oxygen functional groups contribute to the reactivity and selectivity for H2 O2 electrogeneration, respectively. This work affords not only an emerging strategy to design H2 O2 electrosynthesis catalysts with remarkable performance, but also the principles of rational combination of multiple active sites for green and sustainable synthesis of chemicals through electrochemical processes.

Li, C., et al. (2020). "Polyvinylpyrrolidone-Coordinated Single-site Platinum Catalyst Exhibits High Activity for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	At the essence of developing Pt-based single atom catalyst (SAC) for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is to prepare well-defined and stable single Pt sites with desired electro-catalytic efficacy. Herein, we report a facile approach to generate uniformly dispersed Pt sites with outstanding HER performance via photochemical reduction method using polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) molecules as the key addictive to significantly simplify synthesis routes and enhance the catalytic performance. The as-prepared catalyst unfolds remarkable kinetic activities (20 times higher in current density than the commercially available Pt/C) with excellent stability (76.3% of its initial activity after 5000 cycles) for HER. EXAFS measurements and DFT calculations demonstrate a synergetic effect, where the PVP ligands and the support together modulate the electronic structure of Pt atoms, which optimize the hydrogen adsorption energy, resulting in a considerably improved HER activity. Our findings push a step towards the industrial application of Pt-based SACs for the hydrogen economy.

Li, D., et al. (2018). "A Defect-Driven Metal-free Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction in Acidic Electrolyte." Chem 4(10): 2345-2356.
	
Li, F. and J.-B. Baek (2019). "Atomic tailoring of platinum catalysts." Nature Catalysis 2(6): 477-478.
	
Li, J., et al. (2018). "Atomically dispersed manganese catalysts for oxygen reduction in proton-exchange membrane fuel cells." Nature Catalysis.
	
Li, J., et al. (2019). "Ultrahigh-loading Zn Single-atom Catalyst for Highly Efficient Oxygen Reduction Reaction in both Acidic and Alkaline Media." Angewandte Chemie International Edition.
	
Li, J., et al. (2019). "Thermally Driven Structure and Performance Evolution of Atomically Dispersed FeN4 Sites for Oxygen Reduction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	FeN4 moieties embedded in partially graphitized carbon are the most efficient platinum group metal free active sites for the oxygen reduction reaction in acidic proton-exchange membrane fuel cells. However, their formation mechanisms have remained elusive for decades because the Fe-N bond formation process always convolutes with uncontrolled carbonization and nitrogen doping during high-temperature treatment. Here, we elucidate the FeN4 site formation mechanisms through hosting Fe ions into a nitrogen-doped carbon followed by a controlled thermal activation. Among the studied hosts, the ZIF-8-derived nitrogen-doped carbon is an ideal model with well-defined nitrogen doping and porosity. This approach is able to deconvolute Fe-N bond formation from complex carbonization and nitrogen doping, which correlates Fe-N bond properties with the activity and stability of FeN4 sites as a function of the thermal activation temperature.

Li, J. C., et al. (2019). "Dispersive Single-Atom Metals Anchored on Functionalized Nanocarbons for Electrochemical Reactions." Top Curr Chem (Cham) 377(1): 4.
	The use of dispersive single-atom metals anchored on functionalized carbon nanomaterials as electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy conversion reactions represents a burgeoning area of research, due to their unique characteristics of low coordination number, uniform coordination environment, and maximum atomic utilization. Here we highlight the advanced synthetic methods, characterization techniques, and electrochemical applications for carbon-based single-atom metal catalysts, and provide illustrative correlations between molecular/electronic structures and specific catalytic activity for O2 reduction, water splitting, and other emerging reactions including CO2 reduction, H2O2 production, and N2 reduction. We also discuss fundamental principles for the future design of carbon-based single-atom metal catalysts for specific electrochemical reactions. In addition, we explore the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead in further work with carbon-based single-atom metal electrocatalysts.

Li, J.-C., et al. (2019). "Secondary-Atom-Assisted Synthesis of Single Iron Atoms Anchored on N-Doped Carbon Nanowires for Oxygen Reduction Reaction." ACS Catalysis: 5929-5934.
	
Li, P., et al. (2019). "Supramolecular confinement of single Cu atoms in hydrogel frameworks for oxygen reduction electrocatalysis with high atom utilization." Materials Today.
	
Li, Q., et al. (2018). "Fe Isolated Single Atoms on S, N Codoped Carbon by Copolymer Pyrolysis Strategy for Highly Efficient Oxygen Reduction Reaction." Adv Mater: e1800588.
	Heteroatom-doped Fe-NC catalyst has emerged as one of the most promising candidates to replace noble metal-based catalysts for highly efficient oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). However, delicate controls over their structure parameters to optimize the catalytic efficiency and molecular-level understandings of the catalytic mechanism are still challenging. Herein, a novel pyrrole-thiophene copolymer pyrolysis strategy to synthesize Fe-isolated single atoms on sulfur and nitrogen-codoped carbon (Fe-ISA/SNC) with controllable S, N doping is rationally designed. The catalytic efficiency of Fe-ISA/SNC shows a volcano-type curve with the increase of sulfur doping. The optimized Fe-ISA/SNC exhibits a half-wave potential of 0.896 V (vs reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)), which is more positive than those of Fe-isolated single atoms on nitrogen codoped carbon (Fe-ISA/NC, 0.839 V), commercial Pt/C (0.841 V), and most reported nonprecious metal catalysts. Fe-ISA/SNC is methanol tolerable and shows negligible activity decay in alkaline condition during 15000 voltage cycles. X-ray absorption fine structure analysis and density functional theory calculations reveal that the incorporated sulfur engineers the charges on N atoms surrounding the Fe reactive center. The enriched charge facilitates the rate-limiting reductive release of OH* and therefore improved the overall ORR efficiency.

Li, S., et al. (2021). "Oxygen-evolving catalytic atoms on metal carbides." Nat Mater.
	Single-atom catalysts have shown promising performance in various catalytic reactions. Catalytic metal sites supported on oxides or carbonaceous materials are usually strongly coordinated by oxygen or heteroatoms, which naturally affects their electronic environment and consequently their catalytic activity. Here, we reveal the stabilization of single-atom catalysts on tungsten carbides without the aid of heteroatom coordination for efficient catalysis of the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Benefiting from the unique structure of tungsten carbides, the atomic FeNi catalytic sites are weakly bonded with the surface W and C atoms. The reported catalyst shows a low overpotential of 237 mV at 10 mA cm(-)(2), which can even be lowered to 211 mV when the FeNi content is increased, a high turnover frequency value of 4.96 s(-1) (eta = 300 mV) and good stability (1,000 h). Density functional theory calculations show that either metallic Fe/Ni atoms or (hydro)oxide FeNi species are responsible for the high OER activity. We suggest that the application of inexpensive and durable WCx supports opens up a promising pathway to develop further single-atom catalysts for electrochemical catalytic reactions.

Li, S., et al. (2021). "Selective hydrogenation of 5-(hydroxymethyl)furfural to 5-methylfurfural over single atomic metals anchored on Nb2O5." Nat Commun 12(1): 584.
	5-Methylfurfural (MF) is a very useful chemical. Selective hydrogenation of biomass platform molecule 5-(hydroxymethyl)furfural (HMF) to MF using H2 as the reducing agent is very attractive, but challenging because hydrogenation of C=O bond in HMF is more favourable than C-OH both kinetically and thermodynamically, and this route has not been realized. In this work, we prepare isolated single atomic catalysts (SACs) Pt1/Nb2O5-Ov, Pd1/Nb2O5-Ov, and Au1/Nb2O5-Ov, in which single metal atoms are supported on oxygen defective Nb2O5 (Nb2O5-Ov). It is discovered that the SACs can efficiently catalyze the hydrogenation of HMF to MF using H2 as the reducing agent with MF selectivity of >99% at complete conversion, while the selectivities of the metal nanocatalysts supported on Nb2O5 are very poor. A combination of experimental and density function theory (DFT) studies show that the unique features of the SACs for the reaction result from the cooperation of the Nb and Pt sites near the interface in the Pt1/Nb2O5-Ov. The Pt atoms are responsible for the activation of H2 and the Nb sites activate C-OH in the reaction. This work opens the way for producing MF by direct hydrogenation of biomass-derived HMF using H2 as the reductant.

Li, X., et al. (2016). "Single-Atom Pt as Co-Catalyst for Enhanced Photocatalytic H2 Evolution." Adv Mater 28(12): 2427-2431.
	Isolated single-atom platinum (Pt) embedded in the sub-nanoporosity of 2D g-C3 N4 as a new form of co-catalyst is reported. The highly stable single-atom co-catalyst maximizes the atom efficiency and alters the surface trap states of g-C3 N4 , leading to significantly enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution activity, 8.6 times higher than that of Pt nanoparticles and up to 50 times that for bare g-C3 N4 .

Li, X., et al. (2018). "Single Cobalt Atoms Anchored on Porous N-Doped Graphene with Dual Reaction Sites for Efficient Fenton-like Catalysis." J Am Chem Soc.
	Fenton-like process presents one of the most promising strategies to generate reactive oxygen containing radicals to deal with the ever-growing environmental pollution. However, developing improved catalysts with adequate activity and stability is still a long-term goal to realize their practical application. Herein, we demonstrate single cobalt atoms anchored on porous N-doped graphene with dual reaction sites as highly reactive and stable Fenton-like catalysts for efficient catalytic oxidation of recalcitrant organics via activation of peroxymonosulfate (PMS). Our experiments and density function-al theory (DFT) calculations show that the CoN4 site with single Co atom serves as the active site with optimal binding energy for PMS activation, while the adjacent pyrrolic N site adsorbs organic molecules. The dual reaction sites greatly reduce the migration distance of the active singlet oxygen produced from PMS activation and thus improve the Fenton-like catalytic performance.

Li, X., et al. (2020). "Cobalt Single-Atom Catalysts with High Stability for Selective Dehydrogenation of Formic Acid." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Metal-organic framework (MOF)-derived Co-N-C catalysts with isolated single cobalt atoms have been synthesized and compared with cobalt nanoparticles for formic acid dehydrogenation. The atomically dispersed Co-N-C catalyst achieves superior activity, better acid resistance, and improved long-term stability compared with nanoparticles synthesized by a similar route. High-angle annular dark-field-scanning transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance, and X-ray absorption fine structure characterizations reveal the formation of Co(II) Nx centers as active sites. The optimal low-cost catalyst is a promising candidate for liquid H2 generation.

Li, Y., et al. (2019). "Selective light absorber-assisted single nickel atom catalysts for ambient sunlight-driven CO2 methanation." Nat Commun 10(1): 2359.
	Ambient sunlight-driven CO2 methanation cannot be realized due to the temperature being less than 80 degrees C upon irradiation with dispersed solar energy. In this work, a selective light absorber was used to construct a photothermal system to generate a high temperature (up to 288 degrees C) under weak solar irradiation (1 kW m(-2)), and this temperature is three times higher than that in traditional photothermal catalysis systems. Moreover, ultrathin amorphous Y2O3 nanosheets with confined single nickel atoms (SA Ni/Y2O3) were synthesized, and they exhibited superior CO2 methanation activity. As a result, 80% CO2 conversion efficiency and a CH4 production rate of 7.5 L m(-2) h(-1) were achieved through SA Ni/Y2O3 under solar irradiation (from 0.52 to 0.7 kW m(-2)) when assisted by a selective light absorber, demonstrating that this system can serve as a platform for directly harnessing dispersed solar energy to convert CO2 to valuable chemicals.

Li, Z., et al. (2018). "The Marriage of the FeN4 Moiety and MXene Boosts Oxygen Reduction Catalysis: Fe 3d Electron Delocalization Matters." Adv Mater: e1803220.
	Iron-nitrogen-carbon (Fe-N-C) is hitherto considered as one of the most satisfactory alternatives to platinum for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Major efforts currently are devoted to the identification and maximization of carbon-enclosed FeN4 moieties, which act as catalytically active centers. However, fine-tuning of their intrinsic ORR activity remains a huge challenge. Herein, a twofold activity improvement of pristine Fe-N-C through introducing Ti3C2Tx MXene as a support is realized. A series of spectroscopy and magnetic measurements reveal that the marriage of FeN4 moiety and MXene can induce remarkable Fe 3d electron delocalization and spin-state transition of Fe(II) ions. The lower local electron density and higher spin state of the Fe(II) centers greatly favor the Fe d z 2 electron transfer, and lead to an easier oxygen adsorption and reduction on active FeN4 sites, and thus an enhanced ORR activity. The optimized catalyst shows a two- and fivefold higher specific ORR activity than those of pristine catalyst and Pt/C, respectively, even exceeding most Fe-N-C catalysts ever reported. This work opens up a new pathway in the rational design of Fe-N-C catalysts, and reflects the critical influence of Fe 3d electron states in FeN4 moiety supported on MXene in ORR catalysis.

Lin, L., et al. (2019). "Synergistic Catalysis over Iron-Nitrogen Sites Anchored with Cobalt Phthalocyanine for Efficient CO2 Electroreduction." Adv Mater: e1903470.
	Simultaneously achieving high Faradaic efficiency, current density, and stability at low overpotentials is essential for industrial applications of electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (CO2 RR). However, great challenges still remain in this catalytic process. Herein, a synergistic catalysis strategy is presented to improve CO2 RR performance by anchoring Fe-N sites with cobalt phthalocyanine (denoted as CoPc(c)Fe-N-C). The potential window of CO Faradaic efficiency above 90% is significantly broadened from 0.18 V over Fe-N-C alone to 0.71 V over CoPc(c)Fe-N-C while the onset potential of CO2 RR over both catalysts is as low as -0.13 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode. What is more, the maximum CO current density is increased ten times with significantly enhanced stability. Density functional theory calculations suggest that anchored cobalt phthalocyanine promotes the CO desorption and suppresses the competitive hydrogen evolution reaction over Fe-N sites, while the *COOH formation remains almost unchanged, thus demonstrating unprecedented synergistic effect toward CO2 RR.

Lin, Y., et al. (2019). "Fabricating Single-Atom Catalysts from Chelating Metal in Open Frameworks." Adv Mater 31(18): e1808193.
	In the present study, a highly efficient strategy is reported using open framework platforms with abundant chelating ligands to fabricate a series of stable metal single-atom catalysts (SACs). Here, the metal ions are initially anchored onto the active bipyridine sites through postsynthetic modification, followed by pyrolysis and acid leaching. The resulting single metal atoms are uniformly distributed on a nitrogen-doped carbon (N-C) matrix. Interestingly, each metal atom is found to be coordinated with five N atoms, in contrast to the average coordination number of four as previously reported. The as-prepared Fe SAC/N-C catalyst exhibits excellent oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity (with a half-wave potential of 0.89 V), outstanding stability, and good methanol tolerance. The density functional calculations reveal that the coordinated pyridine can favorably modulate the interaction strength of oxygen on the Fe ion and thus improve the ORR activity. More importantly, it is demonstrated that this strategy can be successfully extended to the preparation of other transition metal SACs, simply by altering the metal precursors used in the metalation step.

Lin, Y.-X., et al. (2019). "Boosting selective nitrogen reduction to ammonia on electron-deficient copper nanoparticles." Nature Communications 10(1).
	
Lin, Z., et al. (2019). "Dual Graphitic-N Doping in One Six-member C-ring of Graphene Analogous Particles Enabled an Efficient Electrocatalyst toward Hydrogen Evolution Reaction." Angewandte Chemie International Edition.
	
Liu, B., et al. (2020). "Atomically Dispersed Ni(I) on Alloy-Encapsulated Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanotube Array for High-Performance Electrochemical CO2 Reduction Reaction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Single-atom catalysts (SACs) show great promises for electrochemical CO 2 reduction reaction (CRR), but the low density of active sites and the poor electrical conduction and mass transport of the single-atom electrode greatly limit their apparent performances. Arraying SACs provides an encouraging strategy for designing structured and functional single-atom electrode with high density of exposed active sites and promoted electrical conductivity and mass transport. Herein, we prepared a nickel single-atom electrode consisting of isolated, high-density and low-valent nickel(I) sites anchored on a self-standing N-doped carbon nanotube array with nickel-copper alloy encapsulation on a carbon-fiber paper. The combination of single-atom nickel(I) sites and self-standing array structure gives rise to an excellent electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction performance. The introduction of copper tunes the d-band electron configuration and enhances the adsorption of hydrogen, which impedes the hydrogen evolution reaction. The single nickel atom electrode exhibits a specific current density of -32.87 mA.cm -2 and turnover frequency of 1,962 h -1 at a mild overpotential of 620 mV for CO formation with 97% Faradic efficiency.

Liu, C., et al. (2021). "Constructing FeN4/graphitic nitrogen atomic interface for high-efficiency electrochemical CO2 reduction over a broad potential window." Chem.
	
Liu, D., et al. (2019). "Atomically dispersed platinum supported on curved carbon supports for efficient electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution." Nature Energy.
	
Liu, D., et al. (2018). "Highly Tunable Heterojunctions from Multimetallic Sulfide Nanoparticles and Silver Nanowires." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 57(19): 5374-5378.
	A facile and general strategy is presented to create well-defined heterojunctions with ultra-small multimetallic sulfide nanoparticles (MMSNPs) uniformly coated on sliver nanowires. A unique aspect of this method is the atomic-level pre-integration of multimetallic components by exploiting recently developed supertetrahedral metal sulfide nanoclusters. The use of such nanoclusters also enables the convenient formation of the ultrathin interfacial Ag2 S layer via etching. The heterojunctions (denoted as MMSNPs/Ag2 S/Ag-NWs) benefit from adjustable multimetallic components and display tunable visible-light-driven photocatalytic performance owing to the synergistic effect of multimetallic components from MMSNPs and the high carrier mobility of Ag-NWs. The synthetic strategy opens new routes to designing and fabricating various heterojunctions with multimetallic components, which could further expand their applications in catalysis, electronics, and photonics.

Liu, J. (2013). "Single Atom and Cluster Catalysis: The Era of Aberration-corrected Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy." Microscopy and Microanalysis 19(S2): 1678-1679.
	
Liu, J., et al. (2018). "Carbon-Supported Divacancy-Anchored Platinum Single-Atom Electrocatalysts with Superhigh Pt Utilization for Oxygen Reduction Reaction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Maximizing the platinum utilization in electrocatalysts toward oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is very desirable for large-scale sustainable application of Pt in energy systems. Here, we report a cost-effective carbon-supported carbon-defect-anchored platinum single-atom electrocatalysts (Pt1/C) with remarkable ORR performance. Impressively, the acidic H2/O2 single cell with Pt1/C as the cathode delivers a maximum power density of 520 mW cm-2 at 80 degrees C, corresponding to a superhigh platinum utilization of 0.09 gPt kW-1. Further physical characterization and density functional theory (DFT) computations reveal that the single platinum atoms anchored stably by four carbon atoms neighbouring carbon divacancies (Pt-C4) are the main active centers for the observed high ORR performance.

Liu, J., et al. (2020). "Rare Earth Single Atom Catalysts for Nitrogen and Carbon Dioxide Reduction." Acs Nano.
	Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have attracted much attention owning to their high catalytic properties. Herein, yttrium and scandium rare earth SACs are successfully synthesized on carbon support (Y1/NC and Sc1/NC). Different from the well-known M-N4 structure of M-N-C (M=Fe, Co) catalysts, Sc and Y atoms with large atomic radius tend to be anchored to the large-sized carbon defects through six coordination bonds of nitrogen and carbon. Although Y and Sc-based nanomaterials are generally inactive to room-temperature electrochemical reactions, Y1/NC and Sc1/NC SACs exhibit catalytic activities to nitrogen reduction reaction and carbon dioxide reduction reaction due to the modulation of the local electronic structure of Y/Sc single atoms by N and C coordination. The catalytic functions of rare earth single-atoms not only demonstrate the magical effect of SACs, but also promote the application of rare earth catalysts in room-temperature electrochemical reactions.

Liu, Q., et al. (2018). "The Solid-Phase Synthesis of an Fe-N-C Electrocatalyst for High-Power Proton-Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells." Angewandte Chemie International Edition 57(5): 1204-1208.
	
Liu, S., et al. (2020). "Turning main-group element magnesium into a highly active electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction." Nat Commun 11(1): 938.
	It is known that the main-group metals and their related materials show poor catalytic activity due to a broadened single resonance derived from the interaction of valence orbitals of adsorbates with the broad sp-band of main-group metals. However, Mg cofactors existing in enzymes are extremely active in biochemical reactions. Our density function theory calculations reveal that the catalytic activity of the main-group metals (Mg, Al and Ca) in oxygen reduction reaction is severely hampered by the tight-bonding of active centers with hydroxyl group intermediate, while the Mg atom coordinated to two nitrogen atoms has the near-optimal adsorption strength with intermediate oxygen species by the rise of p-band center position compared to other coordination environments. We experimentally demonstrate that the atomically dispersed Mg cofactors incorporated within graphene framework exhibits a strikingly high half-wave potential of 910 mV in alkaline media, turning a s/p-band metal into a highly active electrocatalyst.

Liu, Z.-P., et al. (2006). "Single Gold Atoms in Heterogeneous Catalysis: Selective 1,3-Butadiene Hydrogenation over Au/ZrO2." Angewandte Chemie 118(41): 7019-7022.
	
Liu, Z.-Q., et al. (2019). "Redox-Inert Fe3+ in Octahedral Sites of Co-Fe Spinel Oxides with Enhanced Oxygen Catalytic Activity for Rechargeable Zn-Air Batteries." Angewandte Chemie International Edition.
	
Lu, J., et al. (2012). "Imaging isolated gold atom catalytic sites in zeolite NaY." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 51(24): 5842-5846.
	
Luo, E., et al. (2019). "Single-Atom Cr-N4 Sites Designed for Durable Oxygen Reduction Catalysis in Acid Media." Angewandte Chemie International Edition.
	
Luo, F., et al. (2020). "P-block single-metal-site tin/nitrogen-doped carbon fuel cell cathode catalyst for oxygen reduction reaction." Nat Mater.
	This contribution reports the discovery and analysis of a p-block Sn-based catalyst for the electroreduction of molecular oxygen in acidic conditions at fuel cell cathodes; the catalyst is free of platinum-group metals and contains single-metal-atom actives sites coordinated by nitrogen. The prepared SnNC catalysts meet and exceed state-of-the-art FeNC catalysts in terms of intrinsic catalytic turn-over frequency and hydrogen-air fuel cell power density. The SnNC-NH3 catalysts displayed a 40-50% higher current density than FeNC-NH3 at cell voltages below 0.7 V. Additional benefits include a highly favourable selectivity for the four-electron reduction pathway and a Fenton-inactive character of Sn. A range of analytical techniques combined with density functional theory calculations indicate that stannic Sn(IV)Nx single-metal sites with moderate oxygen chemisorption properties and low pyridinic N coordination numbers act as catalytically active moieties. The superior proton-exchange membrane fuel cell performance of SnNC cathode catalysts under realistic, hydrogen-air fuel cell conditions, particularly after NH3 activation treatment, makes them a promising alternative to today's state-of-the-art Fe-based catalysts.

Möller, T., et al. (2019). "Efficient CO2 to CO electrolysis on solid Ni–N–C catalysts at industrial current densities." Energy & Environmental Science.
	
Moses-DeBusk, M., et al. (2013). "CO oxidation on supported single Pt atoms: experimental and ab initio density functional studies of CO interaction with Pt atom on theta-Al2O3(010) surface." J Am Chem Soc 135(34): 12634-12645.
	Although there are only a few known examples of supported single-atom catalysts, they are unique because they bridge the gap between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. Here, we report the CO oxidation activity of monodisperse single Pt atoms supported on an inert substrate, theta-alumina (Al2O3), in the presence of stoichiometric oxygen. Since CO oxidation on single Pt atoms cannot occur via a conventional Langmuir-Hinshelwood scheme (L-H scheme) which requires at least one Pt-Pt bond, we carried out a first-principles density functional theoretical study of a proposed pathway which is a variation on the conventional L-H scheme and inspired by the organometallic chemistry of platinum. We find that a single supported Pt atom prefers to bond to O2 over CO. CO then bonds with the oxygenated Pt atom and forms a carbonate which dissociates to liberate CO2, leaving an oxygen atom on Pt. Subsequent reaction with another CO molecule regenerates the single-atom catalyst. The energetics of the proposed mechanism suggests that the single Pt atoms will get covered with CO3 unless the temperature is raised to eliminate CO2. We find evidence for CO3 coverage at room temperature supporting the proposed mechanism in an in situ diffuse reflectance infrared study of CO adsorption on the catalyst's supported single atoms. Thus, our results clearly show that supported Pt single atoms are catalytically active and that this catalytic activity can occur without involving the substrate. Characterization by electron microscopy and X-ray absorption studies of the monodisperse Pt/theta-Al2O3 are also presented.

Pan, Y., et al. (2019). "Regulating the coordination structure of single-atom Fe-NxCy catalytic sites for benzene oxidation." Nat Commun 10(1): 4290.
	Atomically dispersed metal-N-C structures are efficient active sites for catalyzing benzene oxidation reaction (BOR). However, the roles of N and C atoms are still unclear. We report a polymerization-regulated pyrolysis strategy for synthesizing single-atom Fe-based catalysts, and present a systematic study on the coordination effect of Fe-NxCy catalytic sites in BOR. The special coordination environment of single-atom Fe sites brings a surprising discovery: Fe atoms anchored by four-coordinating N atoms exhibit the highest BOR performance with benzene conversion of 78.4% and phenol selectivity of 100%. Upon replacing coordinated N atoms by one or two C atoms, the BOR activities decrease gradually. Theoretical calculations demonstrate the coordination pattern influences not only the structure and electronic features, but also the catalytic reaction pathway and the formation of key oxidative species. The increase of Fe-N coordination number facilitates the generation and activation of the crucial intermediate O=Fe=O species, thereby enhancing the BOR activity.

Pattengale, B., et al. (2020). "Dynamic evolution and reversibility of single-atom Ni(II) active site in 1T-MoS2 electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution." Nat Commun 11(1): 4114.
	1T-MoS2 and single-atom modified analogues represent a highly promising class of low-cost catalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). However, the role of single atoms, either as active species or promoters, remains vague despite its essentiality toward more efficient HER. In this work, we report the unambiguous identification of Ni single atom as key active sites in the basal plane of 1T-MoS2 (Ni@1T-MoS2) that result in efficient HER performance. The intermediate structure of this Ni active site under catalytic conditions was captured by in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy, where a reversible metallic Ni species (Ni(0)) is observed in alkaline conditions whereas Ni remains in its local structure under acidic conditions. These insights provide crucial mechanistic understanding of Ni@1T-MoS2 HER electrocatalysts and suggest that the understanding gained from such in situ studies is necessary toward the development of highly efficient single-atom decorated 1T-MoS2 electrocatalysts.

Pei, G. X., et al. (2014). "Promotional effect of Pd single atoms on Au nanoparticles supported on silica for the selective hydrogenation of acetylene in excess ethylene." New Journal of Chemistry 38(5): 2043.
	
Qin, X., et al. (2019). "Active Sites on Heterogeneous Single-Iron-Atom Electrocatalysts in CO2 Reduction Reaction." ACS Energy Letters 4(7): 1778-1783.
	
Qiu, X., et al. (2019). "Isolated Fe Single Atomic Sites Anchored on Highly Steady Hollow Graphene Nanospheres as an Efficient Electrocatalyst for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction." Adv Sci (Weinh) 6(2): 1801103.
	The rational design of economical and high-performance nanocatalysts to substitute Pt for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is extremely desirable for the advancement of sustainable energy-conversion devices. Isolated single atom (ISA) catalysts have sparked tremendous interests in electrocatalysis due to their maximized atom utilization efficiency. Nevertheless, the fabrication of ISA catalysts remains a grand challenge. Here, a template-assisted approach is demonstrated to synthesize isolated Fe single atomic sites anchoring on graphene hollow nanospheres (denoted as Fe ISAs/GHSs) by using Fe phthalocyanine (FePc) as Fe precursor. The rigid planar macrocycle structure of FePc molecules and the steric-hindrance effect of graphene nanospheres are responsible for the dispersion of Fe-N x species at an atomic level. The combination of atomically dispersed Fe active sites and highly steady hollow substrate affords the Fe ISAs/GHSs outstanding ORR performance with enhanced activity, long-term stability, and better tolerance to methanol, SO2, and NO x in alkaline medium, outperforming the state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C catalyst. This work highlights the great promises of cost-effective Fe-based ISA catalysts in electrocatalysis and provides a versatile strategy for the synthesis of other single metal atom catalysts with superior performance for diverse applications.

Qu, Y., et al. (2019). "Thermal Emitting Strategy to Synthesize Atomically Dispersed Pt Metal Sites from Bulk Pt Metal." J Am Chem Soc 141(11): 4505-4509.
	Developing a facile route to access active and well-defined single atom sites catalysts has been a major area of focus for single atoms catalysts (SACs). Herein, we demonstrate a simple approach to generate atomically dispersed platinum via a thermal emitting method using bulk Pt metal as a precursor, significantly simplifying synthesis routes and minimizing synthesis costs. The ammonia produced by pyrolysis of Dicyandiamide can coordinate with platinum atoms by strong coordination effect. Then, the volatile Pt(NH3) x can be anchored onto the surface of defective graphene. The as-prepared Pt SAs/DG exhibits high activity for the electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction and selective oxidation of various organosilanes. This viable thermal emitting strategy can also be applied to other single metal atoms, for example, gold and palladium. Our findings provide an enabling and versatile platform for facile accessing SACs toward many industrial important reactions.

Qu, Y., et al. (2018). "Direct transformation of bulk copper into copper single sites via emitting and trapping of atoms." Nature Catalysis 1(10): 781-786.
	
Qu, Y., et al. (2019). "Ambient Synthesis of Single-Atom Catalysts from Bulk Metal via Trapping of Atoms by Surface Dangling Bonds." Adv Mater: e1904496.
	Single-atom catalysts (SACs) feature the maximum atom economy and superior performance for various catalysis fields, attracting tremendous attention in materials science. However, conventional synthesis of SACs involves high energy consumption at high temperature, complicated procedures, a massive waste of metal species, and poor yields, greatly impeding their development. Herein, a facile dangling bond trapping strategy to construct SACs under ambient conditions from easily accessible bulk metals (such as Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) is presented. When mixing graphene oxide (GO) slurry with metal foam and drying in ambient conditions, the M(0) would transfer electrons to the dangling oxygen groups on GO, obtaining M(delta+) (0 < delta < 3) species. Meanwhile, M(delta+) coordinates with the surface oxygen dangling bonds of GO to form MO bonds. Subsequently, the metal atoms are pulled out of the metal foam by the MO bonds under the assistance of sonication to give M SAs/GO materials. This synthesis at room temperature from bulk metals provides a versatile platform for facile and low-cost fabrication of SACs, crucial for their mass production and practical application in diverse industrial reactions.

Ren, W., et al. (2019). "Isolated Diatomic Ni-Fe Metal-Nitrogen Sites for Synergistic Electroreduction of CO(2)." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Polynary single-atom structures can integrate the advantage of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts while providing synergistic functions based on different molecules and their interfaces. However, the fabrication and identification of such active site prototype remain elusive. Here we report isolated diatomic Ni-Fe sites anchored on nitrogenated carbon as an efficient electrocatalyst for CO(2) reduction. The catalyst exhibits high selectivity with CO Faradaic efficiency above 90% over a wide potential range from -0.5 to -0.9 V (98% at -0.7 V), and robust durability with 99% of its initial selectivity after 30 hours of electrolysis. Density functional theory studies reveal that the neighbouring Ni-Fe centers not only function in synergy to decrease the reaction barrier for the formation of COOH* and desorption of CO, but also undergo distinct structural evolution into a CO-adsorbed moiety upon CO(2) uptake.

Rong, X., et al. (2019). "Controlled Synthesis of a Vacancy-Defect Single-Atom Catalyst for Boosting CO2 Electroreduction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	The reaction of precursors containing both nitrogen and oxygen atoms with Ni(II) under 500 degrees C can generate a N/O mixing coordinated Ni-N3 O single-atom catalyst (SAC) in which the oxygen atom can be gradually removed under high temperature due to the weaker Ni-O interaction, resulting in a vacancy-defect Ni-N3 -V SAC at Ni site under 800 degrees C. For the reaction of Ni(II) with the precursor simply containing nitrogen atoms, only a no-vacancy-defect Ni-N4 SAC was obtained. Experimental and DFT calculations reveal that the presence of a vacancy-defect in Ni-N3 -V SAC can dramatically boost the electrocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction, with extremely high CO2 reduction current density of 65 mA cm(-2) and high Faradaic efficiency over 90 % at -0.9 V vs. RHE, as well as a record high turnover frequency of 1.35x10(5) h(-1) , much higher than those of Ni-N4 SAC, and being one of the best reported electrocatalysts for CO2 -to-CO conversion to date.

Rong, X., et al. (2019). "Control Synthesis of Vacancy-Defect Single-Atom Catalyst for Boosting CO2 Electroreduction." Angewandte Chemie International Edition.
	
Shang, H., et al. (2020). "Engineering Isolated Mn-N2C2 Atomic Interface Sites for Efficient Bifunctional Oxygen Reduction and Evolution Reaction." Nano Lett.
	Oxygen-involved electrochemical reactions are crucial for plenty of energy conversion techniques. Herein, we rationally designed a carbon-based Mn-N2C2 bifunctional electrocatalyst. It exhibits a half-wave potential of 0.915 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), and the overpotential is 350 mV at 10 mA cm(-2) during oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline condition. Furthermore, by means of operando X-ray absorption fine structure measurements, we reveal that the bond-length-extended Mn(2+)-N2C2 atomic interface sites act as active centers during the ORR process, while the bond-length-shortened high-valence Mn(4+)-N2C2 moieties serve as the catalytic sites for OER, which is consistent with the density functional theory results. The atomic and electronic synergistic effects for the isolated Mn sites and the carbon support play a critical role to promote the oxygen-involved catalytic performance, by regulating the reaction free energy of intermediate adsorption. Our results give an atomic interface strategy for nonprecious bifunctional single-atom electrocatalysts.

Shang, H., et al. (2020). "Engineering unsymmetrically coordinated Cu-S1N3 single atom sites with enhanced oxygen reduction activity." Nat Commun 11(1): 3049.
	Atomic interface regulation is thought to be an efficient method to adjust the performance of single atom catalysts. Herein, a practical strategy was reported to rationally design single copper atoms coordinated with both sulfur and nitrogen atoms in metal-organic framework derived hierarchically porous carbon (S-Cu-ISA/SNC). The atomic interface configuration of the copper site in S-Cu-ISA/SNC is detected to be an unsymmetrically arranged Cu-S1N3 moiety. The catalyst exhibits excellent oxygen reduction reaction activity with a half-wave potential of 0.918 V vs. RHE. Additionally, through in situ X-ray absorption fine structure tests, we discover that the low-valent Cuprous-S1N3 moiety acts as an active center during the oxygen reduction process. Our discovery provides a universal scheme for the controllable synthesis and performance regulation of single metal atom catalysts toward energy applications.

Shen, G., et al. (2020). "Regulating the Spin State of Fe(III) by Atomically Anchoring on Ultrathin Titanium Dioxide for Efficient Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalysis." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 59(6): 2313-2317.
	Ferric oxides and (oxy)hydroxides, although plentiful and low-cost, are rarely considered for oxygen evolution reaction (OER) owing to the too high spin state (eg filling ca. 2.0) suppressing the bonding strength with reaction intermediates. Now, a facile adsorption-oxidation strategy is used to anchor Fe(III) atomically on an ultrathin TiO2 nanobelt to synergistically lower the spin state (eg filling ca. 1.08) to enhance the adsorption with oxygen-containing intermediates and improve the electro-conductibility for lower ohmic loss. The electronic structure of the catalyst is predicted by DFT calculation and perfectly confirmed by experimental results. The catalyst exhibits superior performance for OER with overpotential 270 mV @10 mA cm(-2) and 376 mV @100 mA cm(-2) in alkaline solution, which is much better than IrO2 /C and RuO2 /C and is the best iron-based OER catalyst free of active metals such as Ni, Co, or precious metals.

Shen, H., et al. (2017). "Synergistic Effects between Atomically Dispersed Fe-N-C and C-S-C for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction in Acidic Media." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 56(44): 13800-13804.
	Various advanced catalysts based on sulfur-doped Fe/N/C materials have recently been designed for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR); however, the enhanced activity is still controversial and usually attributed to differences in the surface area, improved conductivity, or uncertain synergistic effects. Herein, a sulfur-doped Fe/N/C catalyst (denoted as Fe/SNC) was obtained by a template-sacrificing method. The incorporated sulfur gives a thiophene-like structure (C-S-C), reduces the electron localization around the Fe centers, improves the interaction with oxygenated species, and therefore facilitates the complete 4 e(-) ORR in acidic solution. Owing to these synergistic effects, the Fe/SNC catalyst exhibits much better ORR activity than the sulfur-free variant (Fe/NC) in 0.5 m H2 SO4 .

Shen, R., et al. (2019). "High-Concentration Single Atomic Pt Sites on Hollow CuSx for Selective O2 Reduction to H2O2 in Acid Solution." Chem.
	
Shi, Y., et al. (2020). "Site-specific electrodeposition enables self-terminating growth of atomically dispersed metal catalysts." Nat Commun 11(1): 4558.
	The growth of atomically dispersed metal catalysts (ADMCs) remains a great challenge owing to the thermodynamically driven atom aggregation. Here we report a surface-limited electrodeposition technique that uses site-specific substrates for the rapid and room-temperature synthesis of ADMCs. We obtained ADMCs by the underpotential deposition of a non-noble single-atom metal onto the chalcogen atoms of transition metal dichalcogenides and subsequent galvanic displacement with a more-noble single-atom metal. The site-specific electrodeposition enables the formation of energetically favorable metal-support bonds, and then automatically terminates the sequential formation of metallic bonding. The self-terminating effect restricts the metal deposition to the atomic scale. The modulated ADMCs exhibit remarkable activity and stability in the hydrogen evolution reaction compared to state-of-the-art single-atom electrocatalysts. We demonstrate that this methodology could be extended to the synthesis of a variety of ADMCs (Pt, Pd, Rh, Cu, Pb, Bi, and Sn), showing its general scope for functional ADMCs manufacturing in heterogeneous catalysis.

Song, B., et al. (2017). "Tuning Mixed Nickel Iron Phosphosulfide Nanosheet Electrocatalysts for Enhanced Hydrogen and Oxygen Evolution." ACS Catalysis 7(12): 8549-8557.
	
Song, W. and E. J. M. Hensen (2013). "Structure Sensitivity in CO Oxidation by a Single Au Atom Supported on Ceria." The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 117(15): 7721-7726.
	
Sun, K., et al. (2022). "Nature-Inspired Design of Molybdenum-Selenium Dual-Single-Atom Electrocatalysts for CO(2) Reduction." Adv Mater 34(44): e2206478.
	Electrochemical CO(2) reduction (ECR) is becoming an increasingly important technology for achieving carbon neutrality. Inspired by the structure of naturally occurring Mo-dependent enzymes capable of activating CO(2) , a heteronuclear Mo-Se dual-single-atom electrocatalyst (MoSA-SeSA) for ECR into CO with a Faradaic efficiency of above 90% over a broad potential window from -0.4 to -1.0 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode is demonstrated here. Both operando characterization and theoretical simulation results verify that MoSA acts as central atoms that directly interact with the ECR feedstock and intermediates, whereas the SeSA adjacent to MoSA modulates the electronic structure of MoSA through long-range electron delocalization for inhibiting MoSA poisoning caused by strong CO adsorption. In addition, the SeSAs far from MoSA help suppress the competing hydrogen evolution side reaction and accelerate the CO(2) transport by repelling H(2) O. This work provides new insight into the precise regulation and in-depth understanding of multisite synergistic catalysis at the atomic scale.

Sun, T., et al. (2021). "Engineering the Coordination Environment of Single Cobalt Atoms for Efficient Oxygen Reduction and Hydrogen Evolution Reactions." ACS Catalysis: 4498-4509.
	
Sun, T., et al. (2018). "Single-atomic cobalt sites embedded in hierarchically ordered porous nitrogen-doped carbon as a superior bifunctional electrocatalyst." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115(50): 12692-12697.
	Exploring efficient and cost-effective catalysts to replace precious metal catalysts, such as Pt, for electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) holds great promise for renewable energy technologies. Herein, we prepare a type of Co catalyst with single-atomic Co sites embedded in hierarchically ordered porous N-doped carbon (Co-SAS/HOPNC) through a facile dual-template cooperative pyrolysis approach. The desirable combination of highly dispersed isolated atomic Co-N4 active sites, large surface area, high porosity, and good conductivity gives rise to an excellent catalytic performance. The catalyst exhibits outstanding performance for ORR in alkaline medium with a half-wave potential (E 1/2) of 0.892 V, which is 53 mV more positive than that of Pt/C, as well as a high tolerance of methanol and great stability. The catalyst also shows a remarkable catalytic performance for HER with distinctly high turnover frequencies of 0.41 and 3.8 s(-1) at an overpotential of 100 and 200 mV, respectively, together with a long-term durability in acidic condition. Experiments and density functional theory (DFT) calculations reveal that the atomically isolated single Co sites and the structural advantages of the unique 3D hierarchical porous architecture synergistically contribute to the high catalytic activity.

Sun, X., et al. (2020). "Facile synthesis of precious-metal single-site catalysts using organic solvents." Nat Chem.
	Single-site catalysts can demonstrate high activity and selectivity in many catalytic reactions. The synthesis of these materials by impregnation from strongly oxidizing aqueous solutions or pH-controlled deposition often leads to low metal loadings or a range of metal species. Here, we demonstrate that simple impregnation of the metal precursors onto activated carbon from a low-boiling-point, low-polarity solvent, such as acetone, results in catalysts with an atomic dispersion of cationic metal species. We show the generality of this method by producing single-site Au, Pd, Ru and Pt catalysts supported on carbon in a facile manner. Single-site Au/C catalysts have previously been validated commercially to produce vinyl chloride, and here we show that this facile synthesis method can produce effective catalysts for acetylene hydrochlorination in the absence of the highly oxidizing acidic solvents previously used.

Sun, X., et al. (2019). "High-performance single atom bifunctional oxygen catalysts derived from ZIF-67 superstructures." Nano Energy.
	
Sun, X., et al. (2019). "Atomic-Level Fe-N-C Coupled with Fe3 C-Fe Nanocomposites in Carbon Matrixes as High-Efficiency Bifunctional Oxygen Catalysts." Small: e1906057.
	Highly active and durable bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts are of pivotal importance for clean and renewable energy conversion devices, but the lack of earth-abundant electrocatalysts to improve the intrinsic sluggish kinetic process of oxygen reduction/evolution reactions (ORR/OER) is still a challenge. Fe-N-C catalysts with abundant natural merits are considered as promising alternatives to noble-based catalysts, yet further improvements are urgently needed because of their poor stability and unclear catalytic mechanism. Here, an atomic-level Fe-N-C electrocatalyst coupled with low crystalline Fe3 C-Fe nanocomposite in 3D carbon matrix (Fe-SAs/Fe3 C-Fe@NC) is fabricated by a facile and scalable method. Versus atomically FeNx species and crystallized Fe3 C-Fe nanoparticles, Fe-SAs/Fe3 C-Fe@NC catalyst, abundant in vertical branched carbon nanotubes decorated on intertwined carbon nanofibers, exhibits high electrocatalytic activities and excellent stabilities both in ORR (E1/2 , 0.927 V) and OER (EJ=10 , 1.57 V). This performance benefits from the strong synergistic effects of multicomponents and the unique structural advantages. In-depth X-ray absorption fine structure analysis and density functional theory calculation further demonstrate that more extra charges derived from modified Fe clusters decisively promote the ORR/OER performance for atomically FeN4 configurations by enhanced oxygen adsorption energy. These insightful findings inspire new perspectives for the rational design and synthesis of economical-practical bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts.

Sun, Y., et al. (2019). "Activity-selectivity trends in the electrochemical production of hydrogen peroxide over single site metal-nitrogen-carbon catalysts." J Am Chem Soc(球磨-单原子).
	Nitrogen-doped carbon materials featuring atomically dispersed metal cations (M-N-C) are an emerging family of materials with potential applications for electrocatalysis. The electrocatalytic activity of M-N-C materials toward four-electron oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) to H2O is a mainstream line of research for replacing platinum-group-metal based catalysts at the cathode of fuel cells. However, fundamental and practical aspects of their electrocatalytic activity toward two-electron ORR to H2O2, a future green "dream" process for chemical industry, remained poorly understood. Here we combined computational and experimental efforts to uncover the trends in electrochemical H2O2 production over a series of M-N-C materials (M=Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) exclusively comprising atomically dispersed M-Nx sites from molecular first principles to bench-scale electrolyzers operating at industrial cur-rent density. We investigated the effect of the nature of 3d-metal within a series of M-N-C catalysts on electrocatalytic activi-ty/selectivity for ORR (H2O2 and H2O products) and H2O2 reduction reaction (H2O2RR). Co-N-C catalyst was uncovered with out-standing H2O2 productivity considering its high ORR activity, highest H2O2 selectivity, and lowest H2O2RR activity. The activity-selectivity trend over M-N-C materials was further analyzed by density functional theory, providing molecular-scale understandings of experimental volcano trends for four- and two-electron ORR. The predicted binding energy of HO* intermediate over Co-N-C catalysts located near the top of the volcano accounting for favourable two-electron ORR. The industrial H2O2 productivity over Co-N-C catalyst was demonstrated in a micro flow cell, exhibiting unprecedented production rate of more than 4 moles peroxide gcatalyst-1 h-1 at current density of 50 mA cm-2.

Sun, Z., et al. (2020). "Simultaneously Realizing Rapid Electron Transfer and Mass Transport in Jellyfish‐Like Mott–Schottky Nanoreactors for Oxygen Reduction Reaction." Advanced Functional Materials.
	
Tang, C., et al. (2021). "Tailoring Acidic Oxygen Reduction Selectivity on Single-Atom Catalysts via Modification of First and Second Coordination Spheres." J Am Chem Soc.
	Product selectivity in multielectron electrocatalytic reactions is crucial to energy conversion efficiency and chemical production. However, a present practical drawback is the limited understanding of actual catalytic active sites. Here, using as a prototype single-atom catalysts (SACs) in acidic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), we report the structure-property relationship of catalysts and show for the first time that molecular-level local structure, including first and second coordination spheres (CSs), rather than individual active atoms, synergistically determines the electrocatalytic response. ORR selectivity on Co-SACs can be tailored from a four-electron to a two-electron pathway by modifying first (N or/and O coordination) and second (C-O-C groups) CSs. Using combined theoretical predictions and experiments, including X-ray absorption fine structure analyses and in situ infrared spectroscopy, we confirm that the unique selectivity change originates from the structure-dependent shift of active sites from the center Co atom to the O-adjacent C atom. We show this optimizes the electronic structure and *OOH adsorption behavior on active sites to give the present "best" activity and selectivity of >95% for acidic H2O2 electrosynthesis.

Tao, X., et al. (2020). "Anchoring Positively Charged Pd Single Atoms in Ordered Porous Ceria to Boost Catalytic Activity and Stability in Suzuki Coupling Reactions." Small: e2001782.
	Single-atom (SA) catalysis bridging homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis offers new opportunities for organic synthesis, but developing SA catalysts with high activity and stability is still a great challenge. Herein, a heterogeneous catalyst of Pd SAs anchored in 3D ordered macroporous ceria (Pd-SAs/3DOM-CeO2 ) is developed through a facile template-assisted pyrolysis method. The high specific surface area of 3DOM CeO2 facilitates the heavily anchoring of Pd SAs, while the introduction of Pd atoms induces the generation of surface oxygen vacancies and prevents the grain growth of CeO2 support. The Pd-SAs/3DOM-CeO2 catalyst exhibits excellent activity toward Suzuki coupling reactions for a broad scope of substrates under ambient conditions, and the Pd SAs can be stabilized in CeO2 in long-term catalytic cycles without leaching or aggregating. Theoretical calculations indicate that the CeO2 supported Pd SAs can remarkably reduce the energy barriers of both transmetalation and reductive elimination steps for Suzuki coupling reactions. The strong metal-support interaction contributes to modulating the electronic state and maintaining the stability of Pd SA sites. This work demonstrates an effective strategy to design and synthesize stable single-atom catalysts as well as sheds new light on the origin for enhanced catalysis based on the strong metal-support interactions.

Tingzhou, Y., et al. (2019). "Mega High Utilization of Sodium Metal Anode Enabled by Single Zinc Atom Sites." Nano Lett.
	Low utilization of active metallic sodium (Na) and uncontrollable growth of Na dendrites remain significant challenges for high-performance Na metal batteries, which are limited to inefficient Na-utilization (<1%) and shallow cycling conditions (0.25-1.0 mAh cm-2). In this work, a kind of Na metal anode with record-high utilization and long-term cycling stability is reported, using carbon substrate-supported nitrogen-anchored zinc (Zn) single atoms as current collector. Single Zn atom sites serve as a strong "magnet" for Na ions, which guide the metallic Na uniform nucleation and free from dendrite-induced short circuit. The nucleation overpotential of our strategy is essentially zero, where most of the reported modified substrates are greatly exceed 20 mV. Specifically, the Na anodes exhibit a high Na stripping/plating Coulombic efficiency with 99.8% over 350 cycles and a stable voltage response with small voltage hysteresis after cycling 1000 h. The full cell exhibits high Na-utilization up to 100% and superior long-term cycling stability for more than 1000 cycles with excellent capacity retention. In terms of both lifetime and Na-utilization, our strategy are significantly outperforms the reported state-of-the-art Na metal anodes. Moreover, this affords new insights into the controllable Na nucleation behavior and high Na utilization, and sheds a fresh light on atomic level design of electrode for Na metal anodes.

Tiwari, J. N., et al. (2018). "Multicomponent electrocatalyst with ultralow Pt loading and high hydrogen evolution activity." Nature Energy 3(9): 773-782.
	
Tong, M., et al. (2021). "Operando Cooperated Catalytic Mechanism of Atomically Dispersed Cu-N4 and Zn-N4 for Promoting Oxygen Reduction Reaction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Dual metal single atom catalysts exhibit superior performance for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), however, the synergistic catalytic mechanism is not deeply understood. Herein, we report a dual metal single atom catalyst consisted of Cu-N4 and Zn-N4 on the N-doped carbon support (Cu/Zn-NC). It exhibits high-efficiency ORR activity with an E onset of 0.98 V and an E 1/2 of 0.83 V, excellent stability (no degradation after 10000 cycles), surpassing state-of-the-art Pt/C and great mass of Pt-free single atom catalysts. Operando XANES demonstrates that the Cu-N4 as active center experiences the change from atomic dispersion to cluster with the cooperation of Zn-N4 during ORR process, and then turns to single atom state again after reaction. DFT calculation further indicates that the adjustment effect of Zn on the d-orbital electron distribution of Cu could benefit to the stretch and cleavage of O-O on Cu active center, speeding up the process of rate determining step of OOH*.

Vanni, M., et al. (2021). "Interlayer Coordination of Pd-Pd Units in Exfoliated Black Phosphorus." J Am Chem Soc.
	The chemical functionalization of 2D exfoliated black phosphorus (2D BP) continues to attract great interest, although a satisfactory structural characterization of the functionalized material has seldom been achieved. Herein, we provide the first complete structural characterization of 2D BP functionalized with rare discrete Pd2 units, obtained through a mild decomposition of the organometallic dimeric precursor [Pd(eta(3)-C3H5)Cl]2. A multitechnique approach, including HAADF-STEM, solid-state NMR, XPS, and XAS, was used to study in detail the morphology of the palladated nanosheets (Pd2/BP) and to unravel the coordination of Pd2 units to phosphorus atoms of 2D BP. In particular, XAS, backed up by DFT modeling, revealed the existence of unprecedented interlayer Pd-Pd units, sandwiched between stacked BP layers. The preliminary application of Pd2/BP as a catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in acidic medium highlighted an activity increase due to the presence of Pd2 units.

Wan, X., et al. (2019). "Fe–N–C electrocatalyst with dense active sites and efficient mass transport for high-performance proton exchange membrane fuel cells." Nature Catalysis.
	
Wang, H., et al. (2019). "Atomically Dispersed Semi-Metallic Selenium on Porous Carbon Membrane as Excellent Electrode for Hydrazine Fuel Cell." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Electrochemically functional porous membranes of low cost are appealing in various electrochemical devices used in modern environmental and energy technologies. Here we describe a scalable strategy to construct electrochemically active, hierarchically porous carbon membranes containing atomically dispersed semi-metallic Se, denoted SeNCM. The isolated Se atoms were stabilized by carbon atoms in the form of a hexatomic ring structure, in which the Se atoms were located at the edges of graphitic domains in SeNCM. This unique atomic configuration is utterly different from that of previously reported transition/noble metal single atom catalysts. The positively charged Se, enlarged graphitic layers, robust electrochemical nature of SeNCM endow them with excellent catalytic activity that is even superior to state-of-the art commercial Pt/C catalyst, and long-term operational stability towards hydrazine oxidation reaction in practical hydrazine fuel cell. This finding will shed light on and initiate the development and understanding of a family of single semi-metallic atom heterogenous catalyst for practical applications.

Wang, J., et al. (2020). "Turning on Zn 4s Electrons in a N2-Zn-B2 Configuration to Stimulate Remarkable ORR Performance." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Zn based single atom catalyst has been recently explored with distinguished stability, of which the fully occupied Zn 2+ 3d 10 4s 2 electronic configuration is Fenton reaction inactive, but the catalytic activity is thus inferior. Herein, we report a new approach to manipulate the s-band by constructing a state-of-the-art B, N co-coordinated Zn-B/N-C catalyst. We confirm both experimentally and theoretically that the unique N2-Zn-B2 configuration is crucial, in which Zn + (3d 10 4s 1 ) can hold enough delocalized electrons to generate suitable binding strength for key reaction intermediates and promote the charge transfer between catalytic surface and ORR reactants. This exclusive effect is not found in the other transition metal counterparts such as M-B/N-C (M=Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu). Consequently, the as obtained catalyst demonstrate impressive ORR activity, along with remarkable long-term stability in both alkaline and acid media. This work presents a new concept in the further design of electrocatalyst.

Wang, J., et al. (2021). "Inversely Tuning the CO2 Electroreduction and Hydrogen Evolution Activity on Metal Oxide via Heteroatom Doping." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Tuning the electronic states near the Fermi level can effectively facilitate the reaction kinetics. However, elucidating the role of a specific electronic state of metal oxide in simultaneously regulating the CO 2 electroreduction reaction (CO 2 RR) and competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is still rare, making it difficult to accurately predict the practical CO 2 RR performance. Herein, replacing the Zn site by heteroatoms with different outer electrons (Mo and Cu) is found to tune both occupied and unoccupied orbitals near the Fermi level of ZnO. Moreover, the different electronic states significantly modulate both CO 2 RR and HER activity with a totally inverse trend, thus dramatically tuning the practical CO 2 RR performance. In parallel, the correlation between electronic states, reaction free energies and practical activity is demonstrated. This work provides a possibility for engineering efficient CO 2 RR eletrocatalysts through tunable composition and electronic structures.

Wang, M., et al. (2021). "Atomically Dispersed Fe–Heteroatom (N, S) Bridge Sites Anchored on Carbon Nanosheets for Promoting Oxygen Reduction Reaction." ACS Energy Letters: 379-386.
	
Wang, Q., et al. (2020). "Ultrahigh-loading of Ir single atoms on NiO matrix to dramatically enhance oxygen evolution reaction." J Am Chem Soc.
	Engineering single-atom electrocatalysts with high-loading amount hold great promise in energy conversion and storage application. Herein, we report a facile and economical approach to achieve an unprecedented high-loading of single Ir atoms, up to ~18wt%, on the nickel oxide (NiO) matrix as the electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction (OER). It exhibits an overpotential of 215 mV at 10 mA cm-2 and a remarkable OER current density in alkaline electrolyte, surpassing NiO and commercial IrO2 by 57 times and 24 times at 1.49 V vs. RHE, respectively. Systematic characterizations, including X-ray absorption spectroscopy and aberration-corrected Z-contrast imaging, demonstrates that the Ir-atoms are atomically dispersed at the outermost surface of NiO and are stabilized by covalent Ir-O bonding, which induces the isolated Ir atoms at a favorable over 4+ oxidation state. Density functional theory calculations reveal that the substituted single Ir atom not only serves as the active site for OER but also activates the surface reactivity of NiO, which thus leads to the dramatically improved OER performance. This synthesis method of developing high-loading single-atom catalysts can be extended to other oxide supports and paves the way for industrial application of single-atom catalysts.

Wang, Q., et al. (2021). "Atomically Dispersed s-Block Magnesium Sites for Electroreduction of CO2 to CO." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Atomically dispersed transition metal sites have been extensively studied for CO 2 electroredution reaction (CO 2 RR) to CO due to their robust CO 2 activation ability. However, the strong hybridization between directionally localized d orbits and CO vastly limits CO desorption and thus the activities of atomically d ispersed transition metal sites. In contrast, s-block metal sites possess nondirectional ly delocalized 3s orbits and hence weak CO adsorption ability, providing a promising way to solve the suffered CO desorption issue. Herein , we constructed atomically dispersed magnesium atoms embedded in graphitic carbon nitride ( Mg-C 3 N 4 ) through a facile heat treatment for CO 2 RR . Theoretical calculations show that the CO desorption on Mg sites is easier than that on Fe and Co sites. This theoretical prediction is demonstrated by experimental CO temperature program desorption and in-situ attenuated total reflection infrared spectroscopy. As a result, Mg-C 3 N 4 exhibits a high turnover frequency of ~ 18,000 per hour in H-cell and a large current density of -300 mA/cm 2 in flow cell , under a high CO Faradaic efficiency >/=90% in KHCO 3 electrolyte . This work sheds a new light on s-block metal sites for efficient CO 2 RR to CO.

Wang, Q., et al. (2018). "Design of active nickel single-atom decorated MoS2 as a pH-universal catalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction." Nano Energy 53: 458-467.
	
Wang, X., et al. (2019). "Review of Metal Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction: From Nanoscale Engineering to Atomic Design." Chem.
	
Wang, Y., et al. (2018). "Rational Design of Fe–N/C Hybrid for Enhanced Nitrogen Reduction Electrocatalysis under Ambient Conditions in Aqueous Solution." ACS Catalysis 9(1): 336-344.
	
Wang, Y., et al. (2018). "Catalysis with Two-Dimensional Materials Confining Single Atoms: Concept, Design, and Applications." Chem Rev.
	Two-dimensional materials and single-atom catalysts are two frontier research fields in catalysis. A new category of catalysts with the integration of both aspects has been rapidly developed in recent years, and significant advantages were established to make it an independent research field. In this Review, we will focus on the concept of two-dimensional materials confining single atoms for catalysis. The new electronic states via the integration lead to their mutual benefits in activity, that is, two-dimensional materials with unique geometric and electronic structures can modulate the catalytic performance of the confined single atoms, and in other cases the confined single atoms can in turn affect the intrinsic activity of two-dimensional materials. Three typical two-dimensional materials are mainly involved here, i.e., graphene, g-C3N4, and MoS2, and the confined single atoms include both metal and nonmetal atoms. First, we systematically introduce and discuss the classic synthesis methods, advanced characterization techniques, and various catalytic applications toward two-dimensional materials confining single-atom catalysts. Finally, the opportunities and challenges in this emerging field are featured on the basis of its current development.

Wang, Y., et al. (2020). "High-efficiency oxygen reduction to hydrogen peroxide catalyzed by Ni single atom catalysts with tetradentate N2O2 coordination in a three-phase flow cell." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) is widely used in today's chemical industry as an oxidant and bleaching agent, whilst also finding medical utilization as a mild antiseptic. Over the past few years, researchers have targeted the discovery of low cost electrocatalysts which can selectively reduce dioxygen (O 2 ) to H 2 O 2 , with modest success to date. Herein, we report the successful synthesis of carbon-supported Ni(II) single atom catalysts possessing a tetradentate Ni-N 2 O 2 coordination via a simple "Schiff base ligand-mediated" pyrolysis strategy. Briefly, a Ni(II) complex of the Schiff base ligand (R,R)-(-)-N,N'-bis(3,5-di-tert-butylsalicylidene)-1,2-cyclohexanediamine (Jacobsen's ligand) was adsorbed onto a carbon black support, followed by pyrolysis of the modified carbon material at 300 o C in Ar. The obtained Ni-N 2 O 2 /C catalyst showed excellent performance for the electrocatalytic reduction of O 2 to H 2 O 2 through a two-electron transfer process in alkaline conditions, with a H 2 O 2 selectivity of 96% realized in rotating ring-disk electrode tests. At a current density of 70 mA cm -2 , a H 2 O 2 production rate of 5.9 mol g catalyst -1 h -1 was achieved using a three - phase flow cell, with good catalyst stability maintained over 8 h of testing. In addition, the Ni-N 2 O 2 /C catalyst could electrocatalytically reduce O 2 in air to H 2 O 2 at a high current density, still affording a high H 2 O 2 selectivity (> 90%). A precise Ni-N 2 O 2 coordination was key to this impressive performance, guiding the future development of metal single atom catalysts for selective O 2 reduction to H 2 O 2 .

Wang, Y., et al. (2013). "Isomorphous substituted bimetallic oxide cluster as a novel strategy for single-atom catalysis." Computational and Theoretical Chemistry 1021: 262-267.
	
Wang, Y. C., et al. (2020). "Porous Carbon Membrane-Supported Atomically Dispersed Pyrrole-Type FeN4 as Active Sites for Electrochemical Hydrazine Oxidation Reaction." Small: e2002203.
	The rational design of catalytically active sites in porous materials is essential in electrocatalysis. Herein, atomically dispersed Fe-Nx sites supported by hierarchically porous carbon membranes are designed to electrocatalyze the hydrazine oxidation reaction (HzOR), one of the key techniques in electrochemical nitrogen transformation. The high intrinsic catalytic activity of the Fe-Nx single-atom catalyst together with the uniquely mixed micro-/macroporous membrane support positions such an electrode among the best-known heteroatom-based carbon anodes for hydrazine fuel cells. Combined with advanced characterization techniques, electrochemical probe experiments, and density functional theory calculation, the pyrrole-type FeN4 structure is identified as the real catalytic site in HzOR.

Wu, J., et al. (2019). "Densely Populated Isolated Single CoN Site for Efficient Oxygen Electrocatalysis." Advanced Energy Materials: 1900149.
	
Wu, S., et al. (2021). "Rapid Interchangeable Hydrogen, Hydride, and Proton Species at the Interface of Transition Metal Atom on Oxide Surface." J Am Chem Soc.
	Hydrogen spillover is the phenomenon where a hydrogen atom, generated from the dissociative chemisorption of dihydrogen on the surface of a metal species, migrates from the metal to the catalytic support. This phenomenon is regarded as a promising avenue for hydrogen storage, yet the atomic mechanism for how the hydrogen atom can be transferred to the support has remained controversial for decades. As a result, the development of catalytic support for such a purpose is only limited to typical reducible oxide materials. Herein, by using a combination of in situ spectroscopic and imaging technique, we are able to visualize and observe the atomic pathway for which hydrogen travels via a frustrated Lewis pair that has been constructed on a nonreducible metal oxide. The interchangeable status between the hydrogen, proton, and hydride is carefully characterized and demonstrated. It is envisaged that this study has opened up new design criteria for hydrogen storage material.

Wu, Y., et al. (2021). "Boosting CO2 Electroreduction over cadmium single atom catalyst via tuning axial coordination structure." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Electroreduction of CO2 to CO has attracted extensive attention because CO is viewed as the closest to commercialization among all products, which can be used in the synthesis of more complex carbon-based fuels or attractive feedstock. Single-atom catalysts (SACs) are considered as a promising class of catalysts, for the maximum atom efficiency and high selectivity for many reactions. In this work, guided by first-principles calculations, it was found that the Cd SACs have excellent performance of activating CO2 , and introduction of axial coordination structure to Cd SACs cannot only further decrease the free energy barrier of CO2 reduction, but also suppress the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Based on above discovery, we designed and synthesized a novel Cd SAC that comprises an optimized CdN4S1 moiety incorporated in carbon matrix. It was shown that the catalyst exhibited outstanding performance of CO2 electroreduction to CO. The faradaic efficiency (FE) of CO could reach up to 99.7% with a current density of 182.2 mA cm-2 in H-type electrolysis cell, and turnover frequency (TOF) value could achieve 73000 h-1 , which was much higher than that reported in the literature up to date. This work shows a successful example to design highly efficient catalysts with the guide of theoretical calculations.

Wu, Z. Y., et al. (2021). "Electrochemical ammonia synthesis via nitrate reduction on Fe single atom catalyst." Nat Commun 12(1): 2870.
	Electrochemically converting nitrate, a widespread water pollutant, back to valuable ammonia is a green and delocalized route for ammonia synthesis, and can be an appealing and supplementary alternative to the Haber-Bosch process. However, as there are other nitrate reduction pathways present, selectively guiding the reaction pathway towards ammonia is currently challenged by the lack of efficient catalysts. Here we report a selective and active nitrate reduction to ammonia on Fe single atom catalyst, with a maximal ammonia Faradaic efficiency of ~ 75% and a yield rate of up to ~ 20,000 mug h(-1) mgcat.(-1) (0.46 mmol h(-1) cm(-2)). Our Fe single atom catalyst can effectively prevent the N-N coupling step required for N2 due to the lack of neighboring metal sites, promoting ammonia product selectivity. Density functional theory calculations reveal the reaction mechanisms and the potential limiting steps for nitrate reduction on atomically dispersed Fe sites.

Xia, C., et al. (2021). "General synthesis of single-atom catalysts with high metal loading using graphene quantum dots." Nat Chem.
	Transition-metal single-atom catalysts present extraordinary activity per metal atomic site, but suffer from low metal-atom densities (typically less than 5 wt% or 1 at.%), which limits their overall catalytic performance. Here we report a general method for the synthesis of single-atom catalysts with high transition-metal-atom loadings of up to 40 wt% or 3.8 at.%, representing several-fold improvements compared to benchmarks in the literature. Graphene quantum dots, later interweaved into a carbon matrix, were used as a support, providing numerous anchoring sites and thus facilitating the generation of high densities of transition-metal atoms with sufficient spacing between the metal atoms to avoid aggregation. A significant increase in activity in electrochemical CO2 reduction (used as a representative reaction) was demonstrated on a Ni single-atom catalyst with increased Ni loading.

Xiao, M., et al. (2019). "A Single-Atom Iridium Heterogeneous Catalyst in Oxygen Reduction Reaction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Combining the advantages of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts, single-atom catalysts (SACs) are bringing new opportunities to revolutionize ORR catalysis in terms of cost, activity and durability. However, the lack of high-performance SACs as well as the fundamental understanding of their unique catalytic mechanisms call for serious advances in this field. Herein, for the first time, we develop an Ir-N-C single-atom catalyst (Ir-SAC) which mimics homogeneous iridium porphyrins for high-efficiency ORR catalysis. In accordance with theoretical predictions, the as-developed Ir-SAC exhibits orders of magnitude higher ORR activity than iridium nanoparticles with a record-high turnover frequency (TOF) of 24.3 e(-) site(-1) s(-1) at 0.85 V vs. RHE) and an impressive mass activity of 12.2 A mg(-1) Ir , which far outperforms the previously reported SACs and commercial Pt/C. Atomic structural characterizations and density functional theory calculations reveal that the high activity of Ir-SAC is attributed to the moderate adsorption energy of reaction intermediates on the mononuclear iridium ion coordinated with four nitrogen atom sites.

Xiao, M., et al. (2021). "3d-Orbital Occupancy Regulated Ir-Co Atomic Pair Toward Superior Bifunctional Oxygen Electrocatalysis." ACS Catalysis: 8837-8846.
	
Xie, F., et al. (2023). "A general approach to 3D-printed single-atom catalysts." Nature Synthesis.
	
Xie, S., et al. (2012). "Enhancement in Aerobic Alcohol Oxidation Catalysis of Au25Clusters by Single Pd Atom Doping." ACS Catalysis 2(7): 1519-1523.
	
Xiong, X., et al. (2020). "Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction to CO over Ni Single Atoms Supported on Defect‐Rich Zirconia." Advanced Energy Materials.
	
Xue, Y., et al. (2018). "Anchoring zero valence single atoms of nickel and iron on graphdiyne for hydrogen evolution." Nat Commun 9(1): 1460.
	Electrocatalysis by atomic catalysts is a major focus of chemical and energy conversion effort. Although transition-metal-based bulk electrocatalysts for electrochemical application on energy conversion processes have been reported frequently, anchoring the stable transition-metal atoms (e.g. nickel and iron) still remains a practical challenge. Here we report a strategy for fabrication of ACs comprising only isolated nickel/iron atoms anchored on graphdiyne. Our findings identify the very narrow size distributions of both nickel (1.23 A) and iron (1.02 A), typical sizes of single-atom nickel and iron. The precision of this method motivates us to develop a general approach in the field of single-atom transition-metal catalysis. Such atomic catalysts have high catalytic activity and stability for hydrogen evolution reactions.

Yan, H., et al. (2018). "Atomic engineering of high-density isolated Co atoms on graphene with proximal-atom controlled reaction selectivity." Nat Commun 9(1): 3197.
	Controllable synthesis of single atom catalysts (SACs) with high loading remains challenging due to the aggregation tendency of metal atoms as the surface coverage increases. Here we report the synthesis of graphene supported cobalt SACs (Co1/G) with a tuneable high loading by atomic layer deposition. Ozone treatment of the graphene support not only eliminates the undesirable ligands of the pre-deposited metal precursors, but also regenerates active sites for the precise tuning of the density of Co atoms. The Co1/G SACs also demonstrate exceptional activity and high selectivity for the hydrogenation of nitroarenes to produce azoxy aromatic compounds, attributable to the formation of a coordinatively unsaturated and positively charged catalytically active center (Co-O-C) arising from the proximal-atom induced partial depletion of the 3d Co orbitals. Our findings pave the way for the precise engineering of the metal loading in a variety of SACs for superior catalytic activities.

Yan, Q.-Q., et al. (2019). "Reversing the charge transfer between platinum and sulfur-doped carbon support for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution." Nature Communications 10(1).
	
Yang, G., et al. (2021). "Regulating Fe-spin state by atomically dispersed Mn-N in Fe-N-C catalysts with high oxygen reduction activity." Nat Commun 12(1): 1734.
	As low-cost electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction applied to fuel cells and metal-air batteries, atomic-dispersed transition metal-nitrogen-carbon materials are emerging, but the genuine mechanism thereof is still arguable. Herein, by rational design and synthesis of dual-metal atomically dispersed Fe,Mn/N-C catalyst as model object, we unravel that the O2 reduction preferentially takes place on Fe(III) in the FeN4/C system with intermediate spin state which possesses one eg electron (t2g4eg1) readily penetrating the antibonding pi-orbital of oxygen. Both magnetic measurements and theoretical calculation reveal that the adjacent atomically dispersed Mn-N moieties can effectively activate the Fe(III) sites by both spin-state transition and electronic modulation, rendering the excellent ORR performances of Fe,Mn/N-C in both alkaline and acidic media (halfwave positionals are 0.928 V in 0.1 M KOH, and 0.804 V in 0.1 M HClO4), and good durability, which outperforms and has almost the same activity of commercial Pt/C, respectively. In addition, it presents a superior power density of 160.8 mW cm(-2) and long-term durability in reversible zinc-air batteries. The work brings new insight into the oxygen reduction reaction process on the metal-nitrogen-carbon active sites, undoubtedly leading the exploration towards high effective low-cost non-precious catalysts.

Yang, H., et al. (2019). "Tunable Synthesis of Hollow Metal-Nitrogen-Carbon Capsules for Efficient Oxygen Reduction Catalysis in Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells." Acs Nano.
	Atomically dispersed metal catalysts anchored on nitrogen-doped (N-doped) carbons demand attention due to their superior catalytic activity relative to that of metal nanoparticle catalysts in energy storage and conversion processes. Herein, we introduce a simple and versatile strategy for the synthesis of hollow N-doped carbon capsules that contain one or more atomically dispersed metals (denoted as H-M-N x-C and H-M(mix)-N x-C, respectively, where M = Fe, Co, or Ni). This method utilizes the pyrolysis of nanostructured core-shell precursors produced by coating a zeolitic imidazolate framework core with a metal-tannic acid (M-TA) coordination polymer shell (containing up to three different metal cations). Pyrolysis of these core-shell precursors affords hollow N-doped carbon capsules containing monometal sites ( e.g., Fe-N x, CoN x, or Ni-N x) or multimetal sites (Fe/Co-N x, Fe/Ni-N x, Co/Ni-N x, or Fe/Co/Ni-N x). This inventory allowed exploration of the relationship between catalyst composition and electrochemical activity for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in acidic solution. H-Fe-N x-C, H-Co-N x-C, H-FeCo-N x-C, H-FeNi-N x-C, and H-FeCoNi-N x-C were particularly efficient ORR catalysts in acidic solution. Furthermore, the H-Fe-N x-C catalyst exhibited outstanding initial performance when applied as a cathode material in a proton exchange membrane fuel cell. The synthetic methodology introduced here thus provides a convenient route for developing next-generation catalysts based on earth-abundant components.

Yang, H., et al. (2019). "A universal ligand mediated method for large scale synthesis of transition metal single atom catalysts." Nat Commun 10(1): 4585.
	There is interest in metal single atom catalysts due to their remarkable activity and stability. However, the synthesis of metal single atom catalysts remains somewhat ad hoc, with no universal strategy yet reported that allows their generic synthesis. Herein, we report a universal synthetic strategy that allows the synthesis of transition metal single atom catalysts containing Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ru, Pt or combinations thereof. Aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy and extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy confirm that the transition metal atoms are uniformly dispersed over a carbon black support. The introduced synthetic method allows the production of carbon-supported metal single atom catalysts in large quantities (>1 kg scale) with high metal loadings. A Ni single atom catalyst exhibits outstanding activity for electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide, achieving a 98.9% Faradaic efficiency at -1.2 V.

Yang, H., et al. (2019). "Scalable Production of Efficient Single-Atom Copper Decorated Carbon Membranes for CO2 Electroreduction to Methanol." Journal of the American Chemical Society.
	
Yang, S., et al. (2016). "Single-Atom Catalyst of Platinum Supported on Titanium Nitride for Selective Electrochemical Reactions." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 55(6): 2058-2062.
	As a catalyst, single-atom platinum may provide an ideal structure for platinum minimization. Herein, a single-atom catalyst of platinum supported on titanium nitride nanoparticles were successfully prepared with the aid of chlorine ligands. Unlike platinum nanoparticles, the single-atom active sites predominantly produced hydrogen peroxide in the electrochemical oxygen reduction with the highest mass activity reported so far. The electrocatalytic oxidation of small organic molecules, such as formic acid and methanol, also exhibited unique selectivity on the single-atom platinum catalyst. A lack of platinum ensemble sites changed the reaction pathway for the oxygen-reduction reaction toward a two-electron pathway and formic acid oxidation toward direct dehydrogenation, and also induced no activity for the methanol oxidation. This work demonstrates that single-atom platinum can be an efficient electrocatalyst with high mass activity and unique selectivity.

Younus, H. A., et al. (2017). "A Robust Molecular Catalyst Generated In Situ for Photo- and Electrochemical Water Oxidation." ChemSusChem 10(5): 862-875.
	Water splitting is the key step towards artificial photosystems for solar energy conversion and storage in the form of chemical bonding. The oxidation of water is the bottle-neck of this process that hampers its practical utility; hence, efficient, robust, and easy to make catalytic systems based on cheap and earth-abundant materials are of exceptional importance. Herein, an in situ generated cobalt catalyst, [Co(II) (TCA)2 (H2 O)2 ] (TCA=1-mesityl-1,2,3-1H-triazole-4-carboxylate), that efficiently conducts photochemical water oxidation under near-neutral conditions is presented. The catalyst showed high stability under photolytic conditions for more than 3 h of photoirradiation. During electrochemical water oxidation, the catalytic system assembled a catalyst film, which proved not to be cobalt oxide/hydroxide as normally expected, but instead, and for the first time, generated a molecular cobalt complex that incorporated the organic ligand bound to cobalt ions. The catalyst film exhibited a low overpotential for electrocatalytic water oxidation (360 mV) and high oxygen evolution peak current densities of 9 and 2.7 mA cm(-2) on glassy carbon and indium-doped tin oxide electrodes, respectively, at only 1.49 and 1.39 V (versus a normal hydrogen electrode), respectively, under neutral conditions. This finding, exemplified on the in situ generated cobalt complex, might be applicable to other molecular systems and suggests that the formation of a catalytic film in electrochemical water oxidation experiments is not always an indication of catalyst decomposition and the formation of nanoparticles.

Yu, P., et al. (2019). "Co Nanoislands Rooted on Co-N-C Nanosheets as Efficient Oxygen Electrocatalyst for Zn-Air Batteries." Adv Mater: e1901666.
	Developing non-precious-metal bifunctional oxygen reduction and evolution reaction (ORR/OER) catalysts is a major task for promoting the reaction efficiency of Zn-air batteries. Co-based catalysts have been regarded as promising ORR and OER catalysts owing to the multivalence characteristic of cobalt element. Herein, the synthesis of Co nanoislands rooted on Co-N-C nanosheets supported by carbon felts (Co/Co-N-C) is reported. Co nanosheets rooted on the carbon felt derived from electrodeposition are applied as the self-template and cobalt source. The synergistic effect of metal Co islands with OER activity and Co-N-C nanosheets with superior ORR performance leads to good bifuctional catalytic performances. Wavelet transform extended X-ray absorption fine spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy certify the formation of Co (mainly Co(0) ) and the Co-N-C (mainly Co(2+) and Co(3+) ) structure. As the air-cathode, the assembled aqueous Zn-air battery exhibits a small charge-discharge voltage gap (0.82 V@10 mA cm(-2) ) and high power density of 132 mW cm(-2) , outperforming the commercial Pt/C catalyst. Additionally, the cable flexible rechargeable Zn-air battery exhibits excellent bendable and durability. Density functional theory calculation is combined with operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy to further elucidate the active sites of oxygen reactions at the Co/Co-N-C cathode in Zn-air battery.

Yuan, K., et al. (2020). "Boosting Oxygen Reduction of Single Iron Active Sites via Geometric and Electronic Engineering: Nitrogen and Phosphorus Dual Coordination." J Am Chem Soc 142(5): 2404-2412.
	Atomically dispersed transition metal active sites have emerged as one of the most important fields of study because they display promising performance in catalysis and have the potential to serve as ideal models for fundamental understanding. However, both the preparation and determination of such active sites remain a challenge. The structural engineering of carbon- and nitrogen-coordinated metal sites (M-N-C, M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cu, etc.) via employing new heteroatoms, e.g., P and S, remains challenging. In this study, carbon nanosheets embedded with nitrogen and phosphorus dual-coordinated iron active sites (denoted as Fe-N/P-C) were developed and determined using cutting edge techniques. Both experimental and theoretical results suggested that the N and P dual-coordinated iron sites were favorable for oxygen intermediate adsorption/desorption, resulting in accelerated reaction kinetics and promising catalytic oxygen reduction activity. This work not only provides efficient way to prepare well-defined single-atom active sites to boost catalytic performance but also paves the way to identify the dual-coordinated single metal atom sites.

Yuan, K., et al. (2017). "Synergetic Contribution of Boron and Fe–Nx Species in Porous Carbons toward Efficient Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction." ACS Energy Letters 3(1): 252-260.
	
Zang, W., et al. (2018). "Single Co Atoms Anchored in Porous N-Doped Carbon for Efficient Zinc−Air Battery Cathodes." ACS Catalysis: 8961-8969.
	
Zang, W., et al. (2020). "Efficient Hydrogen Evolution of Oxidized Ni-N3 Defective Sites for Alkaline Freshwater and Seawater Electrolysis." Adv Mater: e2003846.
	For mass production of high-purity hydrogen fuel by electrochemical water splitting, seawater electrolysis is an attractive alternative to the traditional freshwater electrolysis due to the abundance and low cost of seawater in nature. However, the undesirable chlorine ion oxidation reactions occurring simultaneously with seawater electrolysis greatly hinder the overall performance of seawater electrolysis. To tackle this problem, electrocatalysts of high activity and selectivity with purposely modulated coordination and an alkaline environment are urgently required. Herein, it is demonstrated that atomically dispersed Ni with triple nitrogen coordination (Ni-N3 ) can achieve efficient hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance in alkaline media. The atomically dispersed Ni electrocatalysts exhibit overpotentials as low as 102 and 139 mV at 10 mA cm(-2) in alkaline freshwater and seawater electrolytes, respectively, which compare favorably with those previously reported. They also deliver large current densities beyond 200 mA cm(-2) at lower overpotentials than Pt/C, as well as show negligible current attenuation over 14 h. The X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) experimental analysis and density functional theory (DFT) calculations verify that the Ni-N3 coordination, which exhibits a lower coordination number than Ni-N4 , facilitates water dissociation and hydrogen adsorption, and hence enhances the HER activity.

Zhang, B., et al. (2019). "Manganese acting as a high-performance heterogeneous electrocatalyst in carbon dioxide reduction." Nat Commun 10(1): 2980.
	Developing highly efficient electrocatalysts based on cheap and earth-abundant metals for CO2 reduction is of great importance. Here we demonstrate that the electrocatalytic activity of manganese-based heterogeneous catalyst can be significantly improved through halogen and nitrogen dual-coordination to modulate the electronic structure of manganese atom. Such an electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction exhibits a maximum CO faradaic efficiency of 97% and high current density of ~10 mA cm(-2) at a low overpotential of 0.49 V. Moreover, the turnover frequency can reach 38347 h(-1) at overpotential of 0.49 V, which is the highest among the reported heterogeneous electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction. In situ X-ray absorption experiment and density-functional theory calculation reveal the modified electronic structure of the active manganese site, on which the free energy barrier for intermediate formation is greatly reduced, thus resulting in a great improvement of CO2 reduction performance.

Zhang, C., et al. (2017). "Single-Atomic Ruthenium Catalytic Sites on Nitrogen-Doped Graphene for Oxygen Reduction Reaction in Acidic Medium." Acs Nano 11(7): 6930-6941.
	The cathodic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is essential in the electrochemical energy conversion of fuel cells. Here, through the NH3 atmosphere annealing of a graphene oxide (GO) precursor containing trace amounts of Ru, we have synthesized atomically dispersed Ru on nitrogen-doped graphene that performs as an electrocatalyst for the ORR in acidic medium. The Ru/nitrogen-doped GO catalyst exhibits excellent four-electron ORR activity, offering onset and half-wave potentials of 0.89 and 0.75 V, respectively, vs a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) in 0.1 M HClO4, together with better durability and tolerance toward methanol and carbon monoxide poisoning than seen in commercial Pt/C catalysts. X-ray adsorption fine structure analysis and aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy are performed and indicate that the chemical structure of Ru is predominantly composed of isolated Ru atoms coordinated with nitrogen atoms on the graphene substrate. Furthermore, a density function theory study of the ORR mechanism suggests that a Ru-oxo-N4 structure appears to be responsible for the ORR catalytic activity in the acidic medium. These findings provide a route for the design of efficient ORR single-atom catalysts.

Zhang, E., et al. (2019). "Bismuth Single Atoms Resulting from Transformation of Metal-Organic Frameworks and Their Use as Electrocatalysts for CO2 Reduction." J Am Chem Soc.
	Electrocatalytic reduction reaction of CO2 (CO2RR) is a promising strategy to promote the global carbon balance and combat global climate change. However, a widespread application of CO2 reduction technology hinges on the electrocatalytic systems that selectively and efficiently catalyse CO2 reduction. Herein, exclusive Bi-N4 sites on porous carbon networks can be achieved through thermal decomposition of a preformed bismuth-based metal-organic framework (Bi-MOF) and dicyandiamide (DCD) for CO2RR. Interestingly, in situ environmental transmission electron microscopy analysis not only directly shows the reduction from Bi-MOF into Bi na-noparticles (NPs), but also exhibits subsequent atom-ization of Bi NPs assisted by the NH3 released from the decomposition of DCD. Our catalyst exhibits high intrinsic CO2 reduction activity for CO conversion with a high Faradaic efficiency (FECO up to 97 %) and high turnover frequency (TOF) of 5535 h-1 at a low overpo-tential of 0.39 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode (vs. RHE). Further experiments and density functional theory (DFT) results demonstrate single-atom Bi-N4 site is the dominating active center simultaneously for CO2 activation and the rapid formation of key inter-mediate COOH* with low free energy barrier.

Zhang, G., et al. (2019). "A general route via formamide condensation to prepare atomically dispersed metal–nitrogen–carbon electrocatalysts for energy technologies." Energy & Environmental Science 12(4): 1317-1325.
	
Zhang, H., et al. (2017). "Single Atomic Iron Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction in Acidic Media: Particle Size Control and Thermal Activation." J Am Chem Soc 139(40): 14143-14149.
	It remains a grand challenge to replace platinum group metal (PGM) catalysts with earth-abundant materials for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in acidic media, which is crucial for large-scale deployment of proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). Here, we report a high-performance atomic Fe catalyst derived from chemically Fe-doped zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) by directly bonding Fe ions to imidazolate ligands within 3D frameworks. Although the ZIF was identified as a promising precursor, the new synthetic chemistry enables the creation of well-dispersed atomic Fe sites embedded into porous carbon without the formation of aggregates. The size of catalyst particles is tunable through synthesizing Fe-doped ZIF nanocrystal precursors in a wide range from 20 to 1000 nm followed by one-step thermal activation. Similar to Pt nanoparticles, the unique size control without altering chemical properties afforded by this approach is able to increase the number of PGM-free active sites. The best ORR activity is measured with the catalyst at a size of 50 nm. Further size reduction to 20 nm leads to significant particle agglomeration, thus decreasing the activity. Using the homogeneous atomic Fe model catalysts, we elucidated the active site formation process through correlating measured ORR activity with the change of chemical bonds in precursors during thermal activation up to 1100 degrees C. The critical temperature to form active sites is 800 degrees C, which is associated with a new Fe species with a reduced oxidation number (from Fe3+ to Fe2+) likely bonded with pyridinic N (FeN4) embedded into the carbon planes. Further increasing the temperature leads to continuously enhanced activity, linked to the rise of graphitic N and Fe-N species. The new atomic Fe catalyst has achieved respectable ORR activity in challenging acidic media (0.5 M H2SO4), showing a half-wave potential of 0.85 V vs RHE and leaving only a 30 mV gap with Pt/C (60 mugPt/cm2). Enhanced stability is attained with the same catalyst, which loses only 20 mV after 10000 potential cycles (0.6-1.0 V) in O2 saturated acid. The high-performance atomic Fe PGM-free catalyst holds great promise as a replacement for Pt in future PEMFCs.

Zhang, H., et al. (2019). "Graphene supported single-atom FeN5 catalytic site for efficient electrochemical CO2 reduction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Electrochemical conversion of CO2 to valued products is one of the most important issues but remains a grand challenge in chemistry. Here, we report a novel synthesis approach involving a prolonged thermal pyrolysis of hemin and melamine molecules on graphene for the fabrication of robust and efficient single iron electrocatalyst for electrochemical CO2 reduction. Single iron atom catalyst exhibits a high Faradaic efficiency (~97.0%) for the CO production at a low overpotential of 0.35 V, outperforming all the Fe-N-C-based catalysts. The remarkable performance for CO2-to-CO conversion can be attributed to the presence of highly efficient singly-dispersed FeN5 active sites supported on N-doped graphene with additional axial ligand coordinated with FeN4. Our DFT calculations reveal the axial pyrrolic-nitrogen ligand of the FeN5 site further depletes the electron density of Fe 3d orbitals and thus reduces the Fe-CO pi back-donation, responsible for the rapid desorption of CO with a high selectivity towards CO production.

Zhang, H., et al. (2019). "Graphene supported single-atom FeN5 catalytic site for efficient electrochemical CO2 reduction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Electrochemical conversion of CO2 to valued products is one of the most important issues but remains a grand challenge in chemistry. Here, we report a novel synthesis approach involving a prolonged thermal pyrolysis of hemin and melamine molecules on graphene for the fabrication of robust and efficient single iron electrocatalyst for electrochemical CO2 reduction. Single iron atom catalyst exhibits a high Faradaic efficiency (~97.0%) for the CO production at a low overpotential of 0.35 V, outperforming all the Fe-N-C-based catalysts. The remarkable performance for CO2-to-CO conversion can be attributed to the presence of highly efficient singly-dispersed FeN5 active sites supported on N-doped graphene with additional axial ligand coordinated with FeN4. Our DFT calculations reveal the axial pyrrolic-nitrogen ligand of the FeN5 site further depletes the electron density of Fe 3d orbitals and thus reduces the Fe-CO pi back-donation, responsible for the rapid desorption of CO with a high selectivity towards CO production.

Zhang, H., et al. (2019). "Catalysis of a Single Transition Metal Site for Water Oxidation: From Mononuclear Molecules to Single Atoms." Adv Mater: e1904037.
	Low-cost, nonprecious transition metal (TM) catalysts toward efficient water oxidation are of critical importance to future sustainable energy technologies. The advances in structure engineering of water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) with single TM centers as active sites, for example, single metallic molecular complexes (SMMCs), supported SMMCs, and single-atom catalysts (SACs) in recent reports are examined. The efforts made on these configurations in terms of design principle, advanced characterization, performances and theoretical studies, are critically reviewed. A clear roadmap with the correlations between the single-TM-site-based structures (coordination and geometric structure, TM species, support), and the catalytic performances in water oxidation is provided. The insights bridging SMMCs with SACs are also given. Finally, the challenges and opportunities in the single-TM-site catalysis are proposed.

Zhang, J., et al. (2019). "Single Fe Atom on Hierarchically Porous S, N-Codoped Nanocarbon Derived from Porphyra Enable Boosted Oxygen Catalysis for Rechargeable Zn-Air Batteries." Small: e1900307.
	Iron-nitrogen-carbon materials (Fe-N-C) are known for their excellent oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) performance. Unfortunately, they generally show a laggard oxygen evolution reaction (OER) activity, which results in a lethargic charging performance in rechargeable Zn-air batteries. Here porous S-doped Fe-N-C nanosheets are innovatively synthesized utilizing a scalable FeCl3 -encapsulated-porphyra precursor pyrolysis strategy. The obtained electrocatalyst exhibits ultrahigh ORR activity (E1/2 = 0.84 V vs reversible hydrogen electrode) and impressive OER performance (Ej = 10 = 1.64 V). The potential gap (DeltaE = Ej = 10 - E1/2 ) is 0.80 V, outperforming that of most highly active bifunctional electrocatalysts reported to date. Furthermore, the key role of S involved in the atomically dispersed Fe-Nx species on the enhanced ORR and OER activities is expounded for the first time by ultrasound-assisted extraction of the exclusive S source (taurine) from porphyra. Moreover, the assembled rechargeable Zn-air battery comprising this bifunctional electrocatalyst exhibits higher power density (225.1 mW cm(-2) ) and lower charging-discharging overpotential (1.00 V, 100 mA cm(-2) compared to Pt/C + RuO2 catalyst). The design strategy can expand the utilization of earth-abundant biomaterial-derived catalysts, and the mechanism investigations of S doping on the structure-activity relationship can inspire the progress of other functional electrocatalysts.

Zhang, J., et al. (2019). "Tuning the Coordination Environment in Single-Atom Catalysts to Achieve Highly Efficient Oxygen Reduction Reactions." J Am Chem Soc 141(51): 20118-20126.
	Designing atomically dispersed metal catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is a promising approach to achieve efficient energy conversion. Herein, we develop a template-assisted method to synthesize a series of single metal atoms anchored on porous N,S-codoped carbon (NSC) matrix as highly efficient ORR catalysts to investigate the correlation between the structure and their catalytic performance. The structure analysis indicates that an identical synthesis method results in distinguished structural differences between Fe-centered single-atom catalyst (Fe-SAs/NSC) and Co-centered/Ni-centered single-atom catalysts (Co-SAs/NSC and Ni-SAs/NSC) because of the different trends of each metal ion in forming a complex with the N,S-containing precursor during the initial synthesis process. The Fe-SAs/NSC mainly consists of a well-dispersed FeN4S2 center site where S atoms form bonds with the N atoms. The S atoms in Co-SAs/NSC and Ni-SAs/NSC, on the other hand, form metal-S bonds, resulting in CoN3S1 and NiN3S1 center sites. Density functional theory (DFT) reveals that the FeN4S2 center site is more active than the CoN3S1 and NiN3S1 sites, due to the higher charge density, lower energy barriers of the intermediates, and products involved. The experimental results indicate that all three single-atom catalysts could contribute high ORR electrochemical performances, while Fe-SAs/NSC exhibits the highest of all, which is even better than commercial Pt/C. Furthermore, Fe-SAs/NSC also displays high methanol tolerance as compared to commercial Pt/C and high stability up to 5000 cycles. This work provides insights into the rational design of the definitive structure of single-atom catalysts with tunable electrocatalytic activities for efficient energy conversion.

Zhang, M., et al. (2017). "Metal (Hydr)oxides@Polymer Core-Shell Strategy to Metal Single-Atom Materials." J Am Chem Soc 139(32): 10976-10979.
	Preparing metal single-atom materials is currently attracting tremendous attention and remains a significant challenge. Herein, we report a novel core-shell strategy to synthesize single-atom materials. In this strategy, metal hydroxides or oxides are coated with polymers, followed by high-temperature pyrolysis and acid leaching, metal single atoms are anchored on the inner wall of hollow nitrogen-doped carbon (CN) materials. By changing metal precursors or polymers, we demonstrate the successful synthesis of different metal single atoms dispersed on CN materials (SA-M/CN, M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, FeCo, FeNi, etc.). Interestingly, the obtained SA-Fe/CN exhibits much higher catalytic activity for hydroxylation of benzene to phenol than Fe nanoparticles/CN (45% vs 5% benzene conversion). First-principle calculations further reveal that the high reactivity originates from the easier formation of activated oxygen species at the single Fe site. Our methodology provides a convenient route to prepare a variety of metal single-atom materials representing a new class of catalysts.

Zhang, N., et al. (2020). "High-purity pyrrole-type FeN4 sites as a superior oxygen reduction electrocatalyst." Energy & Environmental Science.
	
Zhang, S. L., et al. (2020). "Metal Atom-Doped Co3 O4 Hierarchical Nanoplates for Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution." Adv Mater: e2002235.
	Electrocatalysts based on hierarchically structured and heteroatom-doped non-noble metal oxide materials are of great importance for efficient and low-cost electrochemical water splitting systems. Herein, the synthesis of a series of hierarchical hollow nanoplates (NPs) composed of ultrathin Co3 O4 nanosheets doped with 13 different metal atoms is reported. The synthesis involves a cooperative etching-coordination-reorganization approach starting from zeolitic imidazolate framework-67 (ZIF-67) NPs. First, metal atom decorated ZIF-67 NPs with unique cross-channels are formed through a Lewis acid etching and metal species coordination process. Afterward, the composite NPs are converted to hollow Co3 O4 hierarchical NPs composed of ultrathin nanosheets through a solvothermal reaction, during which the guest metal species is doped into the octahedral sites of Co3 O4 . Density functional theory calculations suggest that doping of small amount of Fe atoms near the surface of Co3 O4 can greatly enhance the electrocatalytic activity toward the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Benefiting from the structural and compositional advantages, the obtained Fe-doped Co3 O4 hierarchical NPs manifest superior electrocatalytic performance for OER with an overpotential of 262 mV at 10 mA cm(-2) , a Tafel slope of 43 mV dec(-1) , and excellent stability even at a high current density of 100 mA cm(-2) for 50 h.

Zhang, X., et al. (2020). "A General Method for Transition Metal Single Atoms Anchored on Honeycomb-Like Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanosheets." Adv Mater 32(10): e1906905.
	Excavating and developing highly efficient and cost-effective nonnoble metal single-atom catalysts for electrocatalytic reactions is of paramount significance but still in its infancy. Herein, reported is a general NaCl template-assisted strategy for rationally designing and preparing a series of isolated transition metal single atoms (Fe/Co/Ni) anchored on honeycomb-like nitrogen-doped carbon matrix (M1 -HNC-T1 -T2 , M = Fe/Co/Ni, T1 = 500 degrees C, T2 = 850 degrees C). The resulting M1 -HNC-500-850 with M-N4 active sites exhibits superior capability for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) with the half-wave potential order of Fe1 -HNC-500-850 > Co1 -HNC-500-850 > Ni1 -HNC-500-850, in which Fe1 -HNC-500-850 shows better performance than commercial Pt/C. Density functional theory calculations reveal a choice strategy that the strong p-d-coupled spatial charge separation results the Fe-N4 effectively merges active electrons for elevating d-band activity in a van-Hove singularity like character. This essentially generalizes an optimal electronic exchange-and-transfer (ExT) capability for boosting sluggish alkaline ORR activity. This work not only presents a universal strategy for preparing single-atom electrocatalyst to accelerate the kinetics of cathodic ORR but also provides an insight into the relationship between the electronic structure and the electrocatalytical activity.

Zhang, Z., et al. (2020). "Electrochemical deposition as a universal route for fabricating single-atom catalysts." Nature Communications 11(1).
	
Zhao, D., et al. (2019). "MXene (Ti3C2) Vacancy-Confined Single-Atom Catalyst for Efficient Functionalization of CO2." Journal of the American Chemical Society.
	
Zhao, H., et al. (2022). "The role of Cu1–O3 species in single-atom Cu/ZrO2 catalyst for CO2 hydrogenation." Nature Catalysis 5(9): 818-831.
	
Zhao, L., et al. (2019). "Cascade anchoring strategy for general mass production of high-loading single-atomic metal-nitrogen catalysts." Nat Commun 10(1): 1278.
	Although single-atomically dispersed metal-Nx on carbon support (M-NC) has great potential in heterogeneous catalysis, the scalable synthesis of such single-atom catalysts (SACs) with high-loading metal-Nx is greatly challenging since the loading and single-atomic dispersion have to be balanced at high temperature for forming metal-Nx. Herein, we develop a general cascade anchoring strategy for the mass production of a series of M-NC SACs with a metal loading up to 12.1 wt%. Systematic investigation reveals that the chelation of metal ions, physical isolation of chelate complex upon high loading, and the binding with N-species at elevated temperature are essential to achieving high-loading M-NC SACs. As a demonstration, high-loading Fe-NC SAC shows superior electrocatalytic performance for O2 reduction and Ni-NC SAC exhibits high electrocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction. The strategy paves a universal way to produce stable M-NC SAC with high-density metal-Nx sites for diverse high-performance applications.

Zhao, Y., et al. (2019). "Non-metal Single Iodine Atom Electrocatalysts for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Single-atom catalysts (SACs) are attractive for various reactions because of their unique properties. However, common metal-based SACs are quite difficult to design due to the complex synthesis processes required. Here, we report a single atom nickel iodide (SANi-I) electrocatalyst with atomically dispersed non-metal iodine atoms. The SANi-I is prepared via a simple calcination step in a vacuum-sealed ampoule and subsequent cyclic voltammetry activation. Various advanced characterizations, including aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy and synchrotron-based X-ray absorption spectroscopy are applied to confirm the atomic-level dispersion of iodine atoms and detailed structure of SANi-I. Single iodine atoms are found to be isolated by oxygen atoms. The SANi-I exhibits robust structural stability and exceptional electrocatalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction. In-situ Raman spectroscopy reveals that the hydrogen adatom (Hads) is adsorbed by a single iodine atom, forming the I-Hads intermediate, which promotes the HER process.

Zheng, T., et al. (2018). "Large-Scale and Highly Selective CO2 Electrocatalytic Reduction on Nickel Single-Atom Catalyst." Joule.
	
Zhong, W., et al. (2020). "Coupled Vacancy Pairs in Ni-Doped CoSe for Improved Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Production Through Topochemical Deintercalation." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl.
	Vacancy engineering plays vital role in the design of high-performance electrocatalysts. Here, we introduced coupled cation-vacancy pairs in Ni-doped CoSe to achieve boosted hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) activity through a facile topochemical intercalation approach. Adjacent Co vacancy pairs and heteroatom Ni doping contribute together for the upshift of the Se 4pz orbital, which induces larger overlap between the Se 4p and H 1s orbitals. As a result, the free energy of H adsorption can be lowered significantly. With an advanced HER activity of 185.7 mV at 10 mA cm(-2) , this work provides new direction and guidance for the design of novel electrocatalysts.

Zhou, G., et al. (2019). "Theoretical calculation guided design of single-atom catalysts towards fast kinetic and long-life Li-S batteries." Nano Lett.
	Lithium-sulfur (Li-S) batteries are promising next-generation energy storage technologies due to their high theoretical energy density, environmental friendliness and low cost. However, low conductivity of sulfur species, dissolution of polysulfides, poor conversion from sulfur reduction and lithium sulfide (Li2S) oxidation reactions during discharge-charge processes hinder their practical applications. Herein, under the guidance of density functional theory calculations, we have successfully synthesized large-scale single atom vanadium catalysts seeded on graphene to achieve high sulfur content (80 wt% sulfur), fast kinetic (a capacity of 645 mAh g-1 at 3 C rate) and long-life Li-S batteries. Both forward (sulfur reduction) and reverse reactions (Li2S oxidation) are significantly improved by the single atom catalysts. This finding is confirmed by experimental results and consistent with theoretical calculations. The ability of single metal atoms to effectively trap the dissolved lithium polysul fi des (LiPSs) and catalytically convert the LiPSs/Li2S during cycling, significantly improved sulfur utilization, rate capability and cycling life. Our work demonstrates an efficient design pathway for single atom catalysts and provides solutions for the development of high energy/power density Li-S batteries.

Zhou, P., et al. (2019). "Atomically Dispersed Co-P3 on CdS Nanorods with Electron-Rich Feature Boosts Photocatalysis." Adv Mater: e1904249.
	The development of highly efficient photocatalytic systems with rapid photogenerated charge separation and high surface catalytic activity is highly desirable for the storage and conversion of solar energy, yet remains a grand challenge. Herein, a conceptionally new form of atomically dispersed Co-P3 species on CdS nanorods (CoPSA-CdS) is designed and synthesized for achieving unprecedented photocatalytic activity for the dehydrogenation of formic acid (FA) to hydrogen. X-ray absorption near edge structure, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and time-resolved photoluminescence results confirm that the Co-P3 species have a unique electron-rich feature, greatly improving the efficiency of photogenerated charge separation through an interface charge effect. The in situ attenuated total reflection infrared spectra reveal that the Co-P3 species can achieve much better dissociation adsorption of FA and activation of CH bonds than traditional sulfur-coordinated Co single atom-loaded CdS nanorods (CoSSA-CdS). These two new features make CoPSA-CdS exhibit the unprecedented 50-fold higher activity in the photocatalytic dehydrogenation of FA than CoSSA-CdS, and also much better activity than the Ru-, Rh-, Pd-, or Pt-loaded CdS. Besides, CoPSA-CdS also shows the highest mass activity (34309 mmol gCo (-1) h(-1) ) of Co reported to date. First-principles simulation reveals that the Co-P3 species herein can form an active PHCOO intermediate for enhancing the rate-determining dissociation adsorption of FA.

Zhou, Q., et al. (2021). "A Gas‐Phase Migration Strategy to Synthesize Atomically Dispersed Mn‐N‐C Catalysts for Zn–Air Batteries." Small Methods.
	
Zhou, Y., et al. (2020). "Multilayer stabilization for fabricating high-loading single-atom catalysts." Nat Commun 11(1): 5892.
	Metal single-atom catalysts (M-SACs) have emerged as an attractive concept for promoting heterogeneous reactions, but the synthesis of high-loading M-SACs remains a challenge. Here, we report a multilayer stabilization strategy for constructing M-SACs in nitrogen-, sulfur- and fluorine-co-doped graphitized carbons (M = Fe, Co, Ru, Ir and Pt). Metal precursors are embedded into perfluorotetradecanoic acid multilayers and are further coated with polypyrrole prior to pyrolysis. Aggregation of the metals is thus efficiently inhibited to achieve M-SACs with a high metal loading (~16 wt%). Fe-SAC serves as an efficient oxygen reduction catalyst with half-wave potentials of 0.91 and 0.82 V (versus reversible hydrogen electrode) in alkaline and acid solutions, respectively. Moreover, as an air electrode in zinc-air batteries, Fe-SAC demonstrates a large peak power density of 247.7 mW cm(-2) and superior long-term stability. Our versatile method paves an effective way to develop high-loading M-SACs for various applications.

Zhu, C., et al. (2018). "Hierarchically Porous M-N-C (M = Co and Fe) Single-Atom Electrocatalysts with Robust MN
 x
 
 Active Moieties Enable Enhanced ORR Performance." Advanced Energy Materials: 1801956.
	
Zhu, M., et al. (2019). "Covalently Grafting Cobalt Porphyrin onto Carbon Nanotubes for Efficient CO2 Electroreduction." Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 58(20): 6595-6599.
	Molecular complexes with inexpensive transition-metal centers have drawn extensive attention, as they show a high selectivity in the electrochemical conversion of CO2 to CO. In this work, we propose a new strategy to covalently graft cobalt porphyrin onto the surface of a carbon nanotube by a substitution reaction at the metal center. Material characterization and electrochemical studies reveal that the porphyrin molecules are well dispersed at a high loading of 10 wt. %. As a result, the turnover frequency for CO formation is improved by a factor of three compared to traditional physically-mixed catalysts with the same cobalt content. This leads to an outstanding overall current density of 25.1 mA cm(-2) and a Faradaic efficiency of 98.3 % at 490 mV overpotential with excellent long-term stability. This work provides an effective pathway for the improvement of the performance of electrocatalysts that could inspire rational design of molecular catalysts in the future.

Zu, X., et al. (2019). "Efficient and Robust Carbon Dioxide Electroreduction Enabled by Atomically Dispersed Sn(delta) (+) Sites." Adv Mater 31(15): e1808135.
	Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction at considerably low overpotentials still remains a great challenge. Here, a positively charged single-atom metal electrocatalyst to largely reduce the overpotentials is designed and hence CO2 electroreduction performance is accelerated. Taking the metal Sn as an example, kilogram-scale single-atom Sn(delta) (+) on N-doped graphene is first fabricated by a quick freeze-vacuum drying-calcination method. Synchrotron-radiation X-ray absorption fine structure and high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy demonstrate the atomically dispersed Sn atoms are positively charged, which enables CO2 activation and protonation to proceed spontaneously through stabilizing CO2 (*-) * and HCOO(-) *, affirmed by in situ Fourier transform infrared spectra and Gibbs free energy calculations. Furthermore, N-doping facilitates the rate-limiting formate desorption step, verified by the decreased desorption energy from 2.16 to 1.01 eV and the elongated SnHCOO(-) bond length. As an result, single-atom Sn(delta) (+) on N-doped graphene exhibits a very low onset overpotential down to 60 mV for formate production and shows a very large turnover frequency up to 11930 h(-1) , while its electroreduction activity proceeds without deactivation even after 200 h. This work offers a new pathway for manipulating electrocatalytic performance.

