Great efforts have been dedicated to fabricating noble-metal-free catalysts for OER and ORR, such as carbon materials,12–15 transition metal oxides,16–18 hydroxides,19–21 sulfides,11,22,23 and their composite materials.24–27 Among them, transition metal–nitrogen–carbon (TM–N–C) materials have been regarded as one of the most promising electrocatalysts for OER and ORR.28–30 The doped N atoms forming chemical bonds with transition metal nanoparticles are able to modify the electronic structures and optimize the adsorption of intermediates, beneficial for enhancing the oxygen electrochemical processes.31–35 However, traditional synthesis strategies for TM–N–C materials always initiate with heterogeneous composites which are difficult to distribute uniformly. Moreover, the subsequent high-temperature carbonization usually causes severe aggregation of metal nanoparticles. These tedious synthetic procedures are disadvantageous for the rational design of precise architectures with well-defined morphologies and pore sizes for enhancing OER and ORR activity.36–39
Recently, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have attracted worldwide attention by virtue of abundant metal/organic species, tailorable morphologies and tunable porosities.40–46 The carbonization of N-rich zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) as precursors or templates has been proven to be a feasible method to produce TM–N–C materials with unique porous architectures.47–51 For example, Wang et al. reported a bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst with a core–shell structure obtained from carbonization of ZIF-8@ZIF-67 at 800 °C.52 Significantly, in situ grown N-doped CNT materials derived from ZIFs always possess hierarchically porous structures and enhanced electron transport capacity, which favor oxygen electrochemical reactions. For instance, Lou et al. reported a N-doped CNT constructed framework with excellent electrocatalytic activity through high-temperature (over 700 °C) pyrolysis of ZIF-67 in the presence of H2.53 Wang et al. synthesized N-doped CNTs encapsulating Co nanoparticles (Co–N-CNTs) as a bifunctional electrocatalyst via direct pyrolysis of 2D Zn/Co-ZIF at a high temperature (900 °C) in Ar.54 In spite of the great advancement of synthesis strategies, high-temperature pyrolysis is still the critical synthetic condition for designing N-doped CNT structures from MOFs. The high cost and high energy consumption are disadvantageous for their large-scale applications. Additionally, the high-temperature treatment always leads to inevitable aggregation of nanoparticles and loss of nitrogen content, further restricting the electrocatalytic activity. Very recently, Mai et al. developed a low-temperature and slow pyrolysis strategy to obtain N-CNTs from ZIF-67 under an inert atmosphere (435 °C, 8 h). However, the time-consuming pyrolysis and the subsequent heating treatment at a high temperature (i.e., 700 °C) for better performance are still unsatisfactory.55 Therefore, it still remains a great challenge to synthesize MOF-derived N-doped CNT structures with well-defined morphologies and excellent oxygen electrocatalytic activities by using a low-cost and facile synthetic procedure.
Herein, we report a novel low-temperature and KCl-assisted thermolysis strategy (Scheme 1) to fabricate N-doped CNT assembled hollow polyhedra (NCNHP). The presence of KCl accelerates the decomposition of ZIF-67 at a temperature as low as 400 °C. During the pyrolysis process, the first yielded Co nanoparticles catalyze the organic units in ZIF-67 to in situ grow CNTs. The optimized NCNHP material prepared at 500 °C possesses a morphology-preserved CNT-assembled architecture, in which Co nanoparticles are encapsulated within the top of the N-doped CNTs. The hierarchically porous structure and well-dispersed active Co–Nx moieties could provide more reaction zones and electron transfer pathways. Benefiting from the synergistic effect between Co nanoparticles and N-doped CNTs, as well as the unique hierarchical structure, NCNHP can serve as an excellent OER/ORR bifunctional catalyst, exhibiting superior electroactivity and durability when benchmarked with commercial IrO2 for OER and Pt/C for ORR under the same testing conditions.