Carbon materials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs),4 carbon black,30 reduced oxide graphene,31 and porous carbon structure32 have been introduced as substrates to support and disperse the metal–organic molecule to achieve the high density of M–N–C sites during the annealing process due to their high surface areas. For instance, Zhang et al. reported that the atomic dispersion of Fe on hierarchically structured porous carbon (SA–Fe–HPC) frameworks was achieved by pyrolysis of unsubstituted phthalocyanine/iron phthalocyanine complexes and hierarchically structured porous carbon. Benefiting from the protection of organic molecules and the large surface area of the carbon structure, a high concentration/exposure of Fe–N–C sites embedded in hierarchical porous carbon was achieved under the pyrolysis process. The catalyst exhibited high ORR performance with a half-wave potential of 0.89 V, as well as good stability in alkaline solution.32 Although significant progress has been made with M–N–C electrocatalysts, the facile synthesis and preparation of these catalysts with low cost should be taken into consideration for the development of metal single atom-based catalysts.
In this paper, a facile and effective method is reported for the synthesis of atomically dispersed Fe anchored on a carbon matrix for the production of Fe–N4 species anchored to the carbon matrix after the pyrolysis process (denoted as Fe-SA/PC). Abundant pores and oxygen-containing functional groups on the porous carbon were significantly advantageous for reinforcing the dispersion of Fe(phen)3 (phen = 1,10-phenanthroline) by combining the physically confined effects of micropores and the chemical bonding of oxygen dopant and π–π interactions, which were also investigated by computational simulations. The combination of the space-confined effect of micro/meso-pores on porous carbon and the protection of Fe ions by surrounding small molecules can efficiently inhibit the aggregation of iron and facilitate the formation of Fe–Nx species under high-temperature carbonization. The obtained two-dimensional carbon structures possess large surface area and continuous-rich transportation channels, which benefit the exposure of Fe–N4 active sites to facilitate the adsorption of intermediates and electron/mass transport. The strong interactions between the carbon substrate and single-atom Fe endow the catalyst with high efficiency. The optimized catalyst exhibited outstanding ORR activity, as well as high durability and methanol-tolerance in alkaline electrolyte, which is much better than that of the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst. DFT calculations also revealed that the pore defects near Fe–Nx species can further modulate the electronic structure to optimize the adsorption of oxygen intermediates, resulting in excellent electrocatalytic activity. This rational preparation method using low-cost raw materials can be applied to many transition metal-single-atom nanomaterials in energy conversion applications.