Cerium oxide modification is an emerging approach to promote the performance of OER electrocatalysts. Its multivalent nature is beneficial for electron exchanges in the matrices, and therefore in the fine tuning of the matrices' electronic structure and OER performance. Electron transfer from CeO2 to Co in cobalt selenide is responsible for an improved OER performance.17 Partial reduction of Fe(+2) in iron hydroxide induced by CeO2 loading leads to activity enhancement.18 The loading of CeOx to nickel oxide19–21 and cobalt oxide22 can tune the ratio of the +2 valence atoms to +3 valence atoms, and accordingly the number of active sites in the corresponding oxide. A similar effect was found in hollow CoS composited with CoOx.23 However, the host compounds introduced above contained metal ions of multiple valencies, and the contribution of Ce was attributed to the reduction of the +3 valence ions to the +2 valence ions. It is yet to be revealed whether the performance of a sample composed merely of +2 valence metal ions can be promoted by Ce modification.
Herein, we report the facile synthesis of a thin film of cobalt oxide (CoOx) doped by Ce, denoted as CoOx(Ce), the modulation of both the crystal and the chemical structure of CoOx by Ce doping, and the superb performance of CoOx(Ce) in catalysing the OER. Ce doping can drastically induce a structure variation in CoOx from crystalline nanoparticles (3.2 ± 0.9 nm diameter) to an amorphous structure. The chemical structure of the Co ions is identical in both CoOx and CoOx(Ce), while Ce doping brings a new cerium-related O vacancy in CoOx. Consequently, the electrochemical surface area (ECSA) and the intrinsic activity of CoOx(Ce) in the OER were increased, and the apparent activation energy of CoOx(Ce) in the OER was decreased. The CoOx(Ce) can produce a current density of 20 mA cm−2 at the overpotential of 261 mV, and that of 100 mA cm−2 at 302 mV. The CoOx(Ce) shows superior performance in catalysing the OER in comparison with those of CoOx, commercially available RuO2 nanoparticles, and other reported OER electrocatalysts. The facile synthesis, unique structure, and superb performance introduced here will endow CoOx(Ce) with a promising future in industrial water splitting.