The ideal electrocatalyst for the ORR requires a conductive and porous framework to facilitate electron transfer and mass/gas diffusion at the interface between the electrolyte, active sites, and gas phase. In addition, effective and fully accessible active sites are required for superior catalytic activity. Heteroatom-doped carbon materials, in particular nitrogen-doped carbons (NCs), have been recently considered as promising alternatives to Pt. Such metal-free electrocatalysts present several advantages such as low cost, tuneable pore structure, adjustable surface chemistry, and high electrical conductivity.9–19 The excellent activity of NC is ascribed to the nitrogen incorporation into the carbon matrix with a modulated distribution of charge density, which results in a favourable adsorption or effective reduction of O2.20,21 Therefore, the nature and the amount of N-containing active sites play a significant role in the ORR performance.4,20,21 The effect of the carbon matrix is also very important, influencing the electrical conductivity,14 length-to-width ratio,22 topological defects,23,24 surface roughness,25 particle size, etc.26 However, the synergistic role of the carbon framework coupled with heteroatom (nitrogen) doping effects in the ORR has thus far not been investigated.
The major obstacle is the difficulty in simultaneously controlling both the structural features of the carbon matrix and the characteristics of the nitrogen dopants. Herein, we propose a carbon–carbon hybrid structure to demonstrate the different roles of the active sites and the carbon matrix. These composites are based on chitosan-derived NC shells hybridized with conductive graphene frameworks (Scheme 1). Chitosan, an abundant and renewable biomass material, is employed to generate N-containing active sites via the hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) process.25,27 Graphene oxide (GO) with an ultra-thin lamellar structure and rich in functional surface groups is introduced as a multi-functional substrate first to anchor the chitosan precursors, direct their carbonization, and help the resultant NC shells to adhere onto the graphene sheets (Scheme 1a). A series of nanocomposites with tuneable electrical conductivity and nitrogen-containing active sites are thus produced by carefully adjusting the mass ratio between chitosan and GO. The addition of graphene improves the conductivity, but simultaneously decreases the net amount of active sites derived from the nitrogen precursor.