With the progress in tuning intrinsic properties of carbon material with a series of heteroatoms, such as B,15 N,16,17 S,18 P,19 plenty of doped carbon catalysts, including dual-doped20,21 and multiply-doped carbon materials,22 had been reported, although their catalytic mechanism is still unclear.23,24 Among doped carbon catalysts, N-doped ones are the most popular. In general, N-doped metal-free carbon catalysts are prepared mainly through three different routes. First route is in situ introduction of nitrogen atom into carbon framework upon the formation of graphitic plane via processes like chemical vapor deposition (CVD).25–27 This approach is often able to provide high nitrogen content in carbon materials, but it is not practical for mass production of the catalysts for commercial applications. Second route is post-heating graphitic carbon, including carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene and fullerene, with nitrogen-containing substances.28–30 Because of incorporation resistance from pre-existing graphitic structure, the nitrogen fraction is usually too insufficient to develop enough catalytic sites. The last route is direct pyrolysis of nitrogen-rich precursors, such as graphitic carbon nitride,31 melamine foam32 and polymer framework.33,34 However, the low electron conductivity of the materials obtained through this approach does not favor electrocatalytic process.
The design of cheap and stable catalysts for ORR is still a challenge, although tremendous effort has been made in this area. For viability, the activities of these catalysts should at least approach that of traditional but more expensive Pt/C catalysts. Therefore, the rational design of N-doped carbon materials as efficient metal-free ORR catalysts for practical applications needs to meet the following requirements: (1) high content of nitrogen in appropriate chemical bonding state to make as many catalytically active sites as possible for boosting activity; (2) sufficient electron conductivity to favor electron transfer, especially in practical fuel cell applications; and (3) easy access to catalytically active sites and fast mass transfer (ORR occurs at solid–liquid–gas three-phase-interface, which requires that the reactants can easily access the active sites of catalysts).
Taking into account these requirements, we designed a new N-doped carbon material with nanoporous coaxial nanocable structure as metal-free ORR catalyst. The nanoporous carbon sheath not only imparts high surface area to the catalyst, but also allows the reactants to easily access the catalytically active sites and facilitates mass transfer. More importantly, the N-doping was achieved in situ during the formation of nanopores at high temperature, which allow us to achieve high concentration of N-doping. The carbon nanotube cores provide a three-dimensional conductive network and guarantee sufficient electron conductivity for fast electron transfer. Moreover, N-doping in high concentration on porous sheath, instead of directly on carbon nanotube core, will alleviate the damage of doping on carbon nanotube core and thus ensure good conductivity in these materials. As a result, the designed catalyst showed excellent electrocatalytic activity for ORR comparable to commercial Pt/C catalysts, as well as better durability and tolerance to methanol.