The ORR activity of M–N sites was first reported by Jasinski et al., who demonstrated that Co-phthalocyanine exhibits ORR activity under alkaline conditions.13 Since then, numerous efforts have thus been devoted to synthesizing ORR active M–N sites within a carbon support for enhanced ORR activity and stability via the structural integrity of MNC.14–18 For FeNC electrocatalysts that present outstanding ORR activity, the origin of their ORR activity has been identified as the Fe in-plane coordinated with four pyridinic nitrogens (Fe–N4) located at edges and steps within the micropores of the graphitic carbon surface.7,9,14,16 It has been reported that the ORR activity of FeNC increases with the micropore surface area, where the catalytic sites are located. Therefore, significant efforts have been focused on developing microporous structures containing ORR active Fe–N4 sites.7,9,14,16
In addition, single-atom catalysts (SACs) for ORR applications have recently been highlighted due to their maximum atom-utilization efficiency and unique properties for excellent catalytic performance, and the possibility for the direct modulation of the active catalytic center for enhanced performance.19–22 For example, the electronic density of the Co atom catalyst has been modified by regulating the atomic configuration via modulation of the types of coordination atoms, in which Co-N3PS presented outstanding ORR activity. In addition, the influence of N-doping on the catalytic activity of the single Cu catalyst has been reported.23 Therefore, designing SACs with an appropriate chemical environment for enhancing the ORR activity is an important issue.
Recently, additional doping on FeNC has been considerably attempted because the incorporation of an additional dopant, such as B and S, located near Fe–N4 sites is known to lower the electron delocalization around the catalytic center. This improves the interaction with oxygen species, and thus significantly reduces the energy barrier of ORR.24–28 In particular, many research efforts have focused on the development of S co-doped FeNCs (FeSNCs) because S-containing precursors are readily available, and efficient S doping on the carbon framework can be attained.25–28 However, dopant candidates are limited and the direct modulation of the Fe–N4 catalytic site has rarely been achieved.
Meanwhile, FeNC electrocatalysts exhibit outstanding ORR activity under alkaline conditions compared to acidic conditions.14,15,24,27,28 Therefore, ZABs and AEMFCs based on alkaline media have been of significant research interests. It is known that the cathode catalyst loading in AEMFCs is usually 5–20 times larger than proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). In addition, a relatively thick cathode layer is generally required for non-PBCs due to their comparatively low density and ORR activity compared to PBCs, which can cause serious mass-transport issues.29–31 Thus, the mass-transport of reactants and products should be considered as important as the ORR activity, especially under an alkaline-based full-cell configuration.29–31 There have been several reports demonstrating that the hierarchical pore structured non-PBCs show improved ORR activity and single-cell performance due to enhanced mass-transport and facile access to their catalytic sites. For example, the Sung and Hyeon groups have recently reported how to optimize multimodal porous structures to improve their ORR activity and single-cell performance.32 Lee et al. reported that controlling the pore size and doping-site position is directly correlated with the ORR activity and single-cell performance.33 However, excellent single-cell performance due to a synergistic combination of superior ORR catalysts as an alternative to PBCs and effectually facilitated mass-transport through 3D interconnected large mesopores still remains a challenge.
Herein, we demonstrate a facile strategy to produce Fe, Si, and N co-doped carbon (FeSiNC) supported on 3D interconnected mesoporous carbons (3DMCs) with large mesopores (25 and 50 nm) that were dictated by colloidal silica crystal templates. Si moieties chemically bonded to the carbon surface were involved in the formation of atomically distributed FeSixN4−x sites through the substitution of Si at the N position in the Fe–N4 sites. The ORR activity of the FeSiNC catalysts was judiciously evaluated. It was found that FeSiNC with larger mesopores (50 nm, FeSiNC_50a) exhibits excellent ORR activity comparable to the most efficient non-PBCs to date, and presents superior single-cell performances in ZAB and AEMFC compared to those of FeSiNC with smaller mesopores (25 nm, FeSiNC_25a). In addition, it featured increasing catalyst loadings due to an effectually facilitated mass-transport property through the 3D interconnected larger mesopore.
The origin of the ORR activity of FeSiNC was revealed by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. It showed that the most active ORR site of FeSiNC is Fe coordinated to Si and Ns located at the basal plane, in which the inter-edge site also presents outstanding ORR activity. More importantly, the C sites adjacent to the Si dopant in both edge and basal regions of FeSiNC show outstanding ORR activity, whereas the conventional FeNC presents no ORR activity on the C sites. When considering the limited candidates for an additional dopant on the conventional FeNC for enhanced ORR activity and rarely reported direct modulation of the FeNC site, this finding could open a new venue for developing cost-effective, durable, and highly active ORR catalysts with a high catalytic-site density, which can be practically used in ZAB and AEMFC devices.