Inspired by a recent report of Co–Pi electrocatalysts with a high OER activity, much attention has been devoted to cobalt based materials for water oxidation.20In situ X-ray absorption studies indicated that the high OER activities of Co–Pi catalysts could be attributed to the existence of Co4O4 cubane in the catalysts.31 Co3O4 has a typical spinel structure, in which Co2+ is located at tetrahedral sites and Co3+ occupies octahedral sites. The Co4O4 cubane made of octahedral cobalt and oxygen atoms indicates that Co3O4 has the potential for use as an OER catalyst.32,33 Previous studies have verified that the OER activities of Co3O4 nanostructures are strongly correlated with their available surface areas.16 Hence, various strategies have been designed to synthesize Co3O4 catalysts with large surface area and small crystalline size. However, the charge transfer of small Co3O4 nanoparticles with a large surface area is insufficient due to the existence of a large number of grain boundaries.16,34 One approach to solve the charge transfer problem of small nanoparticles is to synthesize porous Co3O4 nanostructures, which preserve the large surface area and small crystalline size features and reduce the amount of grain boundaries.16,34 Another strategy is to maintain the small size of Co3O4 and enhance the charge transfer by dispersing small Co3O4 nanostructures on various conductive supports, e.g. Au,34 Ni foam,16 multi-wall carbon nanotubes26,35 and graphene.36 Their electrochemical activities clearly demonstrate the potential of Co3O4 and their hybrids for use as efficient and robust OER catalysts. However, most methods reported to date involve time-consuming or complex synthetic procedures. For example, the synthesis of ordered mesoporous Co3O4 by a typical hard template method requires multiple steps including: synthesis of a template, grafting of cobalt sources, formation of cobalt oxides and removal of the template.
Herein, we report a facile method combining wet chemistry and high temperature annealing for the scalable synthesis of porous Co3O4 nanoplates. We show that the surface area, pore size, pore density and crystalline size of the resulting porous nanoplates can be easily tailored by varying the annealing temperature. The small crystalline size of Co3O4 is found to be critical to improving the catalytic activity of the catalysts in terms of turnover frequency by delivering abundant surface active sites with low coordination numbers. The contiguous framework of ultrathin (∼10 nm) porous nanoplates not only ensures efficient charge transfer by reducing the number of grain boundaries but also allows easy escape of generated O2 and rapid recovery of surface catalytic sites. Moreover, our study clearly demonstrates that the higher catalytic activity of the surface active centers originates from their small crystalline size, which was ignored in the previous studies of Co-based OER catalysts. The porous Co3O4 nanoplates annealed at 250 °C exhibit the largest surface area (160.9 m2 g−1) and the smallest crystalline size (∼3 nm), which deliver a high catalytic activity for water oxidation reactions.