1 Introduction
To compete with traditional hydrocarbon energy sources and meet the demands of battery applications, it is essential for the next generation of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) to have high specific energy, high energy density, low cost, and reliable safety characteristics.1, 2 In order to improve electrochemical characteristics without sacrificing thermal safety, a deeper understanding of the material synthesis/fabrication, interfacial behavior, and thermal—chemical stabilities are vital.3 With electronic appliances requiring stable voltage delivery, the current LIBs employ graphite or mixtures with soft carbons (carbon black) to achieve stable performance at discharge curves.4 Since 1991, various forms of ordered and disordered (i.e., soft and hard) carbon have been primarily used as anode materials.5 With graphitic carbon, a compromise was identified, which delivered a theoretical maximum capacity of 372 mAh g−1, while maintaining stability and cycling characteristics. This stability comes at a cost of battery capacity, as it takes six carbon atoms to bind a single lithium ion (LiC6) during charging process.6 By contrast, alternative anode materials such as silicon, can bind about four lithium atoms (SiLi4.4), improving energy densities by an order of magnitude.7
Silicon anodes have garnered huge attention as they provide over ten times more theoretical capacity (3579 mAh g-1) than graphite anode. Problematically, the intercalated Si, Li3.75Si, swells in volume by about 320% during charging. Such huge volumetric expansion causes large material stresses, resulting in anode cracking, fracturing, loss of electrical contact (delamination), unstable solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and even catastrophic cell failure.8-11 Naturally, this is unacceptable for practical and industrial applications. To overcome the capacity limitations of carbon, and the mechanical limitations of silicon, manufacturers have moved into composite materials–with the primary structure consisting of graphitic carbon, with silicon nanoparticles implanted within. First reported by Yoshio and co-workers in 2002, the C/Si composites did improve capacity, but the silicon nanoparticles were difficult to merge with the carbon bulk.12, 13 After repeated cycling, it was found that the particles separate and capacity drops.14 Li et al. reported fabrication of graphite-Si composite using polymer blends of poly(diallyl dimethyl-ammonium chloride) and poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) to obtain capacity of 450 mAh g−1 with 95% capacity retention after 200 cycles.15 Zhang et al. prepared core–shell structure (Si@C) using silicon nanoparticles (Si-NPs) and emulsion polymerization of acrylonitrile, followed by pyrolysis.16 The composite15 retained only half of its initial capacity after 20 cycles. Ko et al. embedded Si nanolayers on graphite/carbon hybrids using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) using silane gas to achieve reversible capacity of 517 mAh g−1 after 1st cycle with capacity retention of 96% at the end of 100 cycles.17 Recently, Zhou et al. conducted a study on the Si/graphite@N-doped carbon core–shell composite.18 The composite preparation involved liquid mixing, spray drying, coating by oxidative self-polymerization of dopamine and pyrolysis. The composite delivered initial reversible capacity of 741 mAh g−1 at 300 mA g−1 and 611 mAh g−1 after 100th cycles.18 Li et al. synthesized porous Si/C by electrochemically etching method to obtain capacity of 650 mAh g−1 with capacity retention of 82% after 450 cycles.19 Han et al. prepared a Si@void@C composite by processes such as surface oxidation, precipitation, calcination, CVD method and HF etching. The composite delivered initial discharge capacity of 1045 mAh g−1 at current density of 0.1 A g−1 and after 100th cycle with the capacity retention of 88.3%.20 Studies by Li et al. surpassed this performance further by encapsulating the Si nanoparticles inside “multilayer graphene” structures, which retained 90% of their capacity after 100 cycles.21 While this dramatically boosted cycling capacity and stability, the use of graphene required multiple days of complex fabrication with high risk oxidizing agents; large scale, commercial synthesis of such materials remains cost prohibitive.
The proposed composite anode material can be synthesized through low cost industrial methods, and as such is scalable to large scale production. Through embedding Si nanoparticles (Si-NPs) in a graphitic carbon matrix connected by amorphous soft carbon–this composite material promises enhanced capacity, lifespan, and stability. Specifically, it must be shown that the cells fabricated undergo low energy losses in the course of charge and discharge cycling, maintain high performance, and meet environmental standards for production and disposal. The major aim of this work is to tailor a composite, with double the capacity of graphite. A capacity higher than double would require thicker cathodes, which come with several critical issues: higher impedance for electrons in the solid phase and mass transfer of lithium ions in the electrolyte phase, overall capacity of the cell drops due to higher over potentials upon charging and discharging within fixed voltage limits. Concurrently, for thick electrodes, the geometric current density in the separator is higher, which creates additional overpotential. During charging, this could lead to lithium plating on graphite in proximity to the separator.22 Finally, this work aims to understand and validate the new composite material and cell behavior is crucial for new LIB designs- as the demanding applications and catastrophic consequences of failure provide little margin for error.
In our former Si anode work, a double carbon coated silicon anode was prepared via a two-step thermal reduction of commercial wheat flour and demonstrated capacity of 700 mAh g−1.23 Moreover, the effects of encapsulation and networking of silicon nanoparticles using amorphous carbon and graphite for high performance Li-ion batteries were studied.24 The electrochemical performance between graphite, balled-milled Si-Graphite and composite GSiWh was studied. It demonstrated initial discharge capacity of 804 mAh g−1 at 50 mA g−1. After 200 cycles, it retained 595 mAh g−1 at 200 mA g−1.24 To date however, the mechanistic elucidation of GCSi formation as a function of increasing temperature during synthesis remains unknown. Moreover, to date, no studies have been performed on the thermal safety behavior of GCSi, a crucial step before any new materials can be implemented for practical use.
In this article, we present a novel composite GCSi anode material with its formation mechanism established via in situ environmental transmission electron microscopy (ETEM). Moreover, the thermal safety analysis of the GCSi material is benchmarked against a reference graphite anode for the first time, employing in situ multimode calorimetry. Multimode calorimetry directly studies thermal runaway events using a whole coin cell (comprising anode, cathode, electrolyte, separator, etc.) either in charge or discharge state as a function of increasing temperature. This mechanistic elucidation and thermal safety studies are highly important steps in the advancement of Si-based composite anodes for the next generation of LIBs. Through a combination of ex situ, in situ, and cell performance testing–a complete picture of the anode behavior, advantages, and drawbacks are obtained.
2 Results and Discussion
Figure 1 demonstrates a schematic representation of the development of a composite, comprising of Si, graphite and wheat flour, at elevated temperatures using in situ ETEM coupled with thermal safety analysis using multimode calorimetry (MMC). ETEM studies reveal the formation of a bridge between Si and graphite through an amorphous carbon network. Achieved GCSi composite was used to fabricate a LIB anode, which was used to assemble coin cells. In addition to studying the electrochemical performance of these coin cells, we have studied multimode calorimetry for the first time for testing the thermal safety aspects of the tailored GCSi composite. MMC recorded thermal signature (heat flux) of whole coin cell at elevated temperature helps in understanding the thermal safety behavior of these advanced LIBs. The four primary stages describing the overall study are: 1) in situ thermal treatment characterization during material synthesis, 2) cell fabrication utilizing composite anode, 3) detailed electrochemical analysis, and 4) thermal safety analysis.
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Anode precursors, in situ GCSi composite formation during the heat treatment in ETEM, resulting composite evolution, coin cell fabrication, thermal safety studies and the overall safety outcome.
Material synthesis focuses on combining graphitic carbon, wheat starch, and silicon nanoparticles into a uniform powder followed by in situ ETEM visualization during heat treatment to understand the process synthesis mechanism. Initially, electron microscopy imaging was performed on the individual components, which make up the composite anode material, depicted in Figure 2. It can be seen that the silicon particles are primarily spherical. The graphitic carbon appears as sharp sheets, while the amorphous starch appears as disordered “soft” clusters. Pielichowski and Njuguna identified two primary stages of thermal decomposition of starches below 500 °C.25 The first, occurring below 300 °C, is the loss of water content and physical dehydration. This depends on the initial water content of the starch and ends at 120 °C. Above this temperature, dehydrogenation and breakdown begins to occur in the glucose rings, with the formation of CC bonds.25 The formation of CC bonds then drive the conversion from hydroxyl groups losing the OH bond and transitioning to benzene and furan structures.25 This transition continues through 500 °C, and ultimately results in uniform amorphous carbon structures. In our studies, it is crucial to understand this transition in a composite anode formation. Heating experiments were run with the starch employed for the GCSi mixture-as the primary transition is expected to occur from 400–500 °C. To directly observe this transition, the electron microscopy for this work was performed using the Hitachi HF3300 operating at 300 kV, in the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) mode. This operational setting allowed full characterization of the same GCSi sample clusters with cross sectional imaging (Bright Field, BF and Dark Field, DF), surface imaging (SE), and elemental analysis (EDS). Experiments were also conducted on the individual sample “ingredients,” as well as the GCSi anode composite to demonstrate how each component evolved over time, as well as how the components interact during heating.
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
SE, DF, BF images of components, which make up the composite anode material (Scale bar = 100 nm for all the images). TGA: TGA analysis of the GCSi ingredients, as well as the GCSi mixture. Graphite and silicon do not change or lose mass at temperatures under 600 °C, while starch loses up to 80% of its mass during heating. RED: ETEM imaging of the starch carbonization.
In situ imaging shown in Figure 2-starch under heating, illustrates how the starch changes over the course of the heating ramp. As the temperatures increase, the starch releases the small amount of water it had absorbed (<2%) below 100 °C and carbonizes. Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) tests (Figure 2 TGA) were performed for all the ingredients as well as the mixture. With the starch, the TGA showed a clear and dramatic transition and loss of mass from 300 to 400 °C, with an 81% mass loss occurs during this heating transition. In situ electron microscopy studies of the material, shown in Figure 2 shows a 41% shrink in surface area of the particle observed when the images are analyzed with threshold area analysis. These transformations are shown in Video S1 (Supporting Information). These observations are consistent with the dehydrogenation and second stage transition studies observed by Pielichowski and Njuguna, where the starch transitions from disordered and disconnected hydroxyl carbon groups to the mostly uniform and amorphous aromatic species.25 It was also observed that the silicon and graphite ingredients remained unchanged during TGA heating, while the GCSi mixture lost 38% of its mass, consistent with its addition.
Samples of the GCSi anode material were then prepared where graphite, starch, and silicon overlapped. The silicon particles were buried in a cluster of starch. This cluster sat on top of a sheet of graphite-all suspended over vacuum on the ETEM micro-electro-mechanical-system (MEMS) heating substrate. As the composite sample was heated, the STEM images show that the starch undergoing carbonization and merging with the surrounding material as sharp disconnected edges on the surface are smoothed out. The transition and homogenization can be seen in Figure 3 SE-Zoom frames and Video S2 (Supporting Information).
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
STEM, DF, and elemental map of anode material transformation. The starch can be seen to shrink and carbonize, with the surface sharp edges softening and fusing into a homogeneous mixture. EDS analysis confirms the elements observed are carbon and silicon.
Further analysis was also conducted with high resolution TEM imaging on two new samples, with the TEM sample shown in Figure 4A–C and the HRTEM sample in Figure 4D–F. The strains of nonhomogeneous carbon inside the starch merged bit by bit, shrank, and eventually homogenized into a continuous mass. This homogenization increases the interfacial contact between the three components, with less fractures and disjointed atomic planes shown in Figure 4C,E, binding the Si particles in a “cage” of carbon, and connecting all components at the atomic level. This process thus allows for higher conductivity and performance as shown by electrochemical studies in Figure 5.
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
TEM micrograph of composite anode material transformation. A) Initial mixture of disordered starch, graphite, and Si particles over vacuum. B) At 400 °C the starch is seen shrinking and carbonizing. C) At 600 °C, the starch is almost fully converted to a continuous amorphous sheet. D) High resolution micrograph of the highly disordered interface between Si and starch. E) Following heating at 600 °C, the starch is uniform, and the interface has merged. F) HRTEM shows the amorphous aromatic carbon next to the Si atomic planes. G) Raman Spectra of graphite, silicon and GCSi. H) XRD patterns of graphite, silicon, and GCSi.
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Electrochemical characterization of the synthesized GCSi composite. A) CV curves of the first five cycles obtained at 0.1 mV s−1 in the range of 0.01–2.0 V. B) Voltage profiles for 1st to100th cycle. C) The corresponding rate performance. D) The changes in the electrochemical impedance before and after activation and after 100 cycles at 500 mA g−1. E) Charge–discharge cycling test of GCSi electrode at a current density of 500 mA g−1.
Following the in situ imaging, XRD and Raman spectroscopy were performed for graphite, silicon and post annealing GCSi samples in order to study the phase purity and crystallinity of the ingredients and mixture. Figure 4H shows the XRD patterns for graphite and GCSi. As previous studies have found,26, 27 pure graphite has hexagonal crystal structure and its primary XRD peak at 26.4° 2θ. When combined with silicon nanoparticles, characteristic 2 peaks of cubic crystal structured Si are observable at 28.4°, 47.4°, 56.1°, 69.1°, and 76.3°. Raman spectra analysis (Figure 4G) of graphite shows two characteristic bands, at 1575 and 1328 cm−1. These bands result from the G-band and D-band resonance.28 The ratio (R) of the areas under these bands (D-band: G-band) quantitatively measures the ratio of graphitic to amorphous carbon. The high and narrow peak of the G band in the graphite shows that the sample is, as expected, entirely graphitic in structure. When mixed with Si nanoparticles and the amorphous starch, the GCSi composite sample shows a Raman pattern of all present elements; the G peak widens while the D peak grows, showing the effect of the starch derived carbon in the mixture. A small peak from the silicon particle can be seen at 518 cm−1,29 suggesting the particles generating the signal are buried under clusters of carbon, as seen in the ETEM images.
2.1 Electrochemical Performance of the Tailored Composite GCSi Anode
To quantify the performance of the tailored GCSi anode, electrochemical studies were conducted in conjunction with multiple mode calorimetry thermal safety tests. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis were carried out between 0.01 and 2.0 V at 0.1 mV s−1 and 1 to 10 MHz at 25 °C, respectively. During the CV tests, shown in Figure 5A, oxidation peaks were observed at 0.2, 0.25, and 0.48 V and a reduction peak at 0.16 V. The 0.2 V peak is characteristic of graphite delithiation. Numerous scientific reports reveal delithiation of Si happens via two peaks below 0.5 V.23, 30, 31 Here, two characteristic peaks are observed at 0.25 and 0.48 V. Notably, during the reduction process the active species response for Si and graphite, merged together and revealed itself as a single reduction peak at 0.16 V. The formation of the solid electrolyte interface also occurs gradually, with a shoulder developing from 0.12 to 0.35 V.23, 24, 32 Since Si-NPs are coated with a network of carbon, there are no sharp SEI peaks at 0.4 V, implying there is suppressed SEI formation on this novel composite anode.
Figure 5B shows voltage profiles for GCSi composite cycled at 50 mA g−1 for initial two cycles followed by 500 mA g−1 for rest of the cycles. Presence of silicon and carbon causes two lithiation and delithiation plateaus in the profile. Silicon and graphite lithiates around 0.2 and 0.1 V, and they delithiates around 0.44 and 0.2 V, respectively. The sloping behavior arises due to the presence of amorphous carbon in the composite. Interestingly, most of the capacity is obtained below 1.5 V, this is very important for the ideal industrial anodes. Figure 5C shows rate studies of GCSi anode composite indicating the gravimetric capacities. Multiple rate galvanostatic cycling of the cell are exhibited at different rates between 50 and 1000 mA g−1. GCSi exhibits high capacity of about 980, 960, 890, 705, and 610 mAh g−1 at current densities of 50, 100, 200, 500, and 1000 mA g−1, respectively. This is much higher when compared to that reported for commercial graphite. Etacheri et al. reported capacities of 330, 250, and 70 mAh g−1 at current densities of C/10, C/5, and 1C for commercial graphite material.33 Hence, we see the composite provides much robust and high specific capacities compared to commercial graphite. In Figure 5D, an ideal Nyquist plot of LIBs shows two semicircles with 45° linear drift of diffusion. The first high frequency semicircle is due to formation of SEI film and the middle frequency semicircle is due to charge transfer resistance at the interface of electrode and electrolyte and double layer capacitance.34 The straight line indicates the diffusion of lithium ions. For better understanding about the composite system, EIS was performed on the fully delithiated cell. As shown in Figure 5D, the series resistance (Rs) for the freshly constructed cell was 2.5 Ω, which remained consistent even after the 1st cycle. As the cycles progressed, the Rs increased due to conductivity loss, which arises mainly due to either current collector corrosion or binder decomposition, leading to additional impedance.35 The Rs after 100th cycle was 5.8 Ω. The charge transfer resistance (RCT) for the first cycle was found to be 21 Ω, whereas after 10th cycle it was 12 Ω. After 100th cycle, the charge transfer resistance was 14 Ω. The initial reduction in charge transfer resistance is observed mainly because of the volume expansion of silicon causes a built up of stress inside the electrode.36 Such phenomena leads to the formation of well-developed pores in the electrode and better contact between particles, and current collector facilitating the better charge movement across the electrode. After 100 cycle, there is slight increase in RCT, which arises due to possible stress in the overall electrode that might have developed from continuous long cycling of the electrode.36, 37 However, in the current scenario, the presence of amorphous carbon network around Si-NPs prevents them from delaminating. Hence, significant increase in RCT is not observed, thus explaining the importance of tortuosity in the electrodes.37
As shown in Figure 5E, the first-cycle gravimetric discharge capacity of GCSi composite was 1126 mAh g−1 with a high coulombic efficiency of 83%. This is higher compared to 78.3%,38 80.3%,39 and 79.9%40 recently reported in literature for silicon anodes. There is an initial, irreversible capacity loss of 284 mAh g−1. The main cause of this initial capacity fade is the formation of a SEI layer on the composite anode.41, 42 The 1st and 2nd cycles are formation and stabilization cycles. During these two cycles, the applied current is 50 mA g−1 and helps in stable SEI formation and proper structural network development of the composite. After the completion of the first two cycles, the GCSi electrode demonstrates highly stable electrochemical performance at a higher current density of 500 mA g−1. GCSi shows an average discharge capacity of 540 mAh g−1. Performance of GCSi composite was compared against its key ingredients: graphite and silicon. Enormous capacity fade was observed for silicon electrode within first few cycles. For graphite, it gave stable but lower average specific capacity about ≈261 mAh g−1, at 1C cycling rate (Figure S3, Supporting Information). For a bare silicon electrode, there is a huge capacity fade mainly due to the unstable SEI layer, which depletes the available lithium ions. However, in the presence of a protective carbon cage around Si-NPs further strengthened by graphite particles, issues of pulverization and delamination are reduced to a greater extent. Loss of lithium ions is prevented inside the system, which helps in achieving high capacity for GCSi. One thing to be noted is that the tremendous volume change of Si-NPs during lithiation can sometimes lead to inevitable volume change of the carbon shell. This induces cracks on the carbon shell and exposes Si to the electrolyte causing SEI layer formation and a breakdown of the electrode structure.43 Hence, bolstering the Si-NPs-carbon network setup with graphite particles provide excellent mechanical property to the electrode. Eventually, it also suppresses the volume expansion of the core Si, so as to form a more stable interface between particles and minimize cracking and fracturing of the SEI layer. Composites with varying percentage of Si were synthesized and cycled at current density of 200 mA g−1. After 100 cycles, for 5%, 10%, 25%, and 50% Si composites, discharge specific capacity of 294, 365, 676, and 269 mAh g−1 were achieved (Figure S2, Supporting Information). There is improvement in the specific capacities of composites with increase in the Si content. However, for 50% Si composite, after 100 cycles, there is fade in capacity due to the inherent issues of silicon material becoming dominant and affecting the cycling performance.
To benchmark the cell stability and thermal safety, multiple CR-2032 coin cells were prepared using GCSi anode, reference graphite anode, lithium cobalt oxide cathode, polypropylene separator with 5% FEC (v/v) with 1 m LiPF6 dissolved in 1:1 EC:DEC electrolyte in full-cell configuration to conduct multiple module calorimetry studies. Typically, researchers use differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) to study SEI breakdown chemical reactions, electrolyte salt decomposition, the reaction of electrolyte with electrode material and the thermal properties of the materials.3, 44 However, the scale of operation (sample size) is very small (milligrams), and it could generate some artifacts. Hence, for a better understanding about the dynamics of the batteries there is a requirement for more sophisticated characterization systems.45 MMC creates synergy of DSC and accelerated rate calorimetry (ARC) wherein it measures chemical reactions, specific heat phase changes like a DSC and, runs adiabatic tests to check process safety analogous to an ARC. Major difference are the size of operation (i.e., MMC can perform these tests on gram-size samples and on whole coin cell).46 Also, MMC can easily be plugged to an external battery cycler and used for isothermal cycling to check performance under different charge-discharge rates. The heat flux during cycling can be measured with high accuracy to determine cell efficiency for different battery chemistries. The MMCs unique capabilities allowed the in situ study of thermal runaway and the measurement of heat changes during electrochemical reactions of the cells.
For studying the thermal behavior of the different materials in a typical LIB, the cells were cycled at 20 mA g−1 between 0.01 and 2.0 V, near the anode theoretical max capacity values. The cells were charged to 100% SOC before initiating calorimetry studies; heating from room temperature till 300 °C at the rate of 0.5 K min−1. Temperatures below 300 °C are critical for initiation of the thermal runaway event and hence are of primary focus in the current study.47 Figure 6A shows the schematic of MMC. It consists of a chamber, in which the sample coin cell is tested against a reference cell. The chamber also contains a temperature sensor and a heat flux sensor. The whole chamber is surrounded by a heater for conducting variety of experiments such as isothermal cycling, calorimetry, etc. The actual photograph of the MMC is shown in Figure 6B. Multiple mode calorimetry data for graphite and GCSi electrodes when coupled in full cell configuration, respectively is shown in Figure 6C,D. 25 °C is considered as the optimal working temperature for batteries and 60 °C being the upper threshold for functioning.48 Around 80 °C, the SEI layer starts degenerating and decomposing and the exotherm slope begins as shown in Figure 5C,D. Around 110–130 °C, electrolyte breakdown occurs and generates gases inside the cell.49 Also, there is an exothermic esterification reaction between CMC binder with LiPF6 around 125 °C.47 The system remains stable until the polypropylene begins to melt causing an internal short circuit. It is observed that between 155–165 °C there is an endothermic peak which results from the melting of the polypropylene (PP) separator and gasket of the coin cell.50 Melting of the PP separator results in a short-circuited cell which leads to a thermal runaway situation. Around 170–175 °C, binder meltdown and reaction with lithiated material occurs,51 generating very high exothermic peaks observed after 180 °C. Thermal runaway also results from a reaction between electrolyte and intercalated Li inside the electrode material.44 These exothermic peaks are observed between 180–250 °C. Above 200 °C, it has been reported that the electrolyte LiPF6 salt melts, absorbing the heat supplied to it.50, 52 CMC binder in composite electrode melts around 270 °C. As observed, major contributor for initiation of thermal runaway situation comes from anode, electrolyte and separator however, with temperature rise, the delithiated cathode contributes toward sustenance of runaway condition. As Li is removed from the lattice of LCO, it increases the oxidation potential, causing more solvent decomposition at the solvent-crystal interface. Also, it leads to a high possibility of PVDF polymer-solvent interaction.51 These phenomena are observed above 200 °C.51
Figure 6
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Multiple Mode Calorimetry studies. A) Schematic depicting MMC Instrument. B) Actual photograph of MMC. C) Graphite with lithium cobalt oxide cathode in full cell configuration data. D) GCSi with lithium cobalt oxide cathode in full cell configuration data.
From the obtained plots for the graphite and GCSi anode in full cell configuration, energy released per specific capacity of the cell during the thermal runaway event was determined. From multiple cells tested, about 2.41 kJ g−1 of heat is released from graphite anode, which is less than that of GCSi (2.81 kJ g−1), during thermal runaway. One crucial observation is the change in the thermal runaway onset. There is a single broad exothermic peak for graphite, which appears around 194 °C. In the case of GCSi anode, exothermic peaks are observed at 194 and 200 °C. Also, there is a slight delay in the onset of the main thermal runaway event in the composite compared to graphite. Comparing the energy released per specific capacity of the full cell, it is found that GCSi was 20.89 kJ Ah−1 compared to 21.56 kJ Ah−1. The heat released from the composite is lesser than the heat released by graphite material. Possible reasoning for lower heat generation for composite is that lithium is stored in graphite in the form of LiC6, where the electron cloud exists above the carbon ring structure. The bonding between lithium atoms in graphite is loose compared to that in Si, where they are bonded in form of alloy, which have stronger bonds. Removal of Li (delithiation) from LixSi occurs at higher potential ≈0.44 V versus Li/Li+ compared from LixC6, which is ≈0.15 V. Study by Jiang and Dahn has shown that this should lead to ≈10% lesser enthalpy reaction for reaction of electrolyte with lithiated silicon compared to graphite.53 Second, amorphous carbon due to absence of long-range graphitic boundaries are not susceptible to exfoliation by electrolyte intercalation. It is shown to be used as a potential Li+ storage material at higher temperature compared to graphite anodes, which have SEI decomposition at temperature beyond 60–80 °C.54 Mainly, silicon has buildup of thicker LiF layer and other reaction products on its surface and for similar capacities, silicon composite will have lesser contact area with electrolyte, which leads to slower reaction.53 It is also reported that compared to conventional graphite with similar moles of lithium, the lithiated silicon shows lower reactivity between 100 °C and 350 °C.47, 53, 55 This suggest that the synergistic effect of each ingredient of the composite results in lowering the exothermic heat released during thermal runaway reactions. It appears that the composite material is slightly safer to use as a battery anode compared to the age-old graphite material.
3 Conclusions
The field of batteries does not follow the Moore's Law,56 however, with the rise in demand for high performance, new electrode materials are required which can deliver enhanced energy density, safety, and stability. A new composite anode material, containing 25 wt% Si-NPs interfaced to graphite with starch derived carbon is proposed. To overcome the early life capacity losses which are associated with the swelling behavior of silicon, the composite is annealed at 600 °C for 120 min. This annealing step, observed by in situ ETEM, helps in homogenizing the composite structure, encapsulating the silicon nanoparticles, and binding the nanoparticles to the bulk of the graphite. The designed GCSi composite architecture delivered a high initial capacity of 1126 mAh g−1 with a superior coulombic efficiency of 83%. After the formation cycles were completed, the GCSi material delivered a capacity of 638 mAh g−1 and retained 448 mAh g−1 capacity at a current density of 500 mA g−1 after 100 cycles. This stable and high performance could be related to the well entangled network of the starch derived amorphous carbon, thereby imparting the improved electrochemical kinetics and enhanced structural stability to the well baked anode. This proposed approach of incorporating amorphous carbon into the silicon-graphite composites reduces the critical inherent issues of silicon electrodes and provides a dramatic boost in the storage capacity without the fall off and instabilities of the silicon anodes. Calorimetry studies performed indicate a good cell stability, with a multiple stage thermal runaway observed during testing. Overall the heat generation from the use of composite as an anode was 20.89 kJ Ah−1 compared to 21.56 kJ Ah−1 from the graphite anode. This suggests it is an intrinsically safer, higher capacity anode material for battery systems compared to the commercially used graphite. However, this thermal performance study recommends that thermal stability is the critical issue that needs to be focused on before silicon becomes a viable substitute. In all, the GCSi composite offers high capacity, high stability and safer material for the next generation of lithium ion cells.
4 Experimental Section
Material synthesis focuses on the scalable production process of combining graphitic carbon, wheat starch, and silicon nanoparticles into a homogeneous powder via ball milling. During aftertreatment, this powder was then heat treated and visualized in situ as the material anneals to better understand the process.
Material Preparation: Graphite powder was obtained from MSE Supplies and used as received. Si-NPs (diameter around 100 nm), carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC), Fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC), 1 m LiPF6 solution in ethylene carbonate (EC)/diethyl carbonate (DEC) (50/50 v/v) were sourced from Sigma Aldrich. The starch material source was wheat flour, purchased from Ashirvaad ITC Ltd. Super P carbon black (SP) was sourced from TIMCAL.
Electrode and Cell Fabrication: Si nanoparticles were added to the starch powder in the optimized ratio 2:3 and ball milled for 20 min at 15 Hz. Graphite was then added with a 4:5 ratio and milled again. In presence of Argon gas, the final precursor was baked at 600 °C for 2 h. The final material was labeled GCSi and had a Si loading of 30.58 wt%. Electrodes using the GCSi composite were prepared using 80 wt% GCSi, 10 wt% CMC, and 10 wt% SP in deionized water. Using the Thinky mixer, the slurry was uniformly mixed and homogenized for 10 min. The homogenized slurry was casted on to the Copper current collector by the doctor blade technique. Once laminated, it was dried at 80 °C overnight in a vacuum oven. The dried laminate was calendered before punching the electrode discs from it. The loading mass of the electrodes was ≈2 mg cm−2.
Electrochemical Characterization: Electrodes of 15.5 mm were punched from the dried laminate and dried in a vacuum oven before using them in making CR2032 coin cells (MTI Corporation) for determining the electrochemical performance. The cells were prepared in the glove box having an inert (99.998% argon) atmosphere with H2O and O2 concentration <1 ppm. Cells were assembled containing the composite electrodes, Celgrad 2500 separators and electrolyte. The electrolyte consisted of 5 vol% FEC in 1 m LiPF6 dissolved in EC/DEC solution. Galvanostatic cycling was conducted employing Arbin cycler within voltage ranges of 0.01–2.0 V and current densities of 50, 100, 200, 500, and 1000 mA g−1. To determine the cycle stability of the composite, constant current density of 500 mA g−1 was applied. Cell specific capacities were calculated using the active mass (excluding mass of binder and Super P carbon black) of the electrodes. Cyclic voltammetry was collected using Gamry-600 reference system at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 from 10 mV to 2 V. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements were also conducted by Gamry-600 reference system with data collected at 0.1 V after 1st, 10th, and 100th cycle. AC voltage perturbation of 10 mV amplitude was applied over frequency range 1 MHz–0.01 Hz. Potentials mentioned were versus Li+/Li.
Bulk Sample Characterization: Thermal Gravimetric Analyzer-i1000 (TGA-i1000, Instrument Specialists Incorporated) was utilized for the determination of the material weight loss. The X-ray powder diffraction pattern was recorded with the Rigaku SmartLab XRD having a Cu Kα radiation source, which scanned at the rate of 2° min−1 from 10° to 90° 2θ. Thermo Scientific DXR 2 Raman Microscope equipped with 633 nm laser (3 mW) was used to generate the Raman spectra. Multiple Module Calorimetry MMC 274 Nexus (Netzsch Gerätebau GmbH, Germany) was used to conduct calorimetry experiments of the cells from room temperature till 300 °C.
In Situ Electron Microscopy Analysis: All electron microscopy was performed on a Hitachi HF3300 Environmental Transmission Electron Microscope. The HF3300 ETEM employed in this study provided an exceptional platform for fully characterizing the material on one instrument pre and post pyrolysis–instead of requiring multiple other specialized instruments. By using the controlled environment, heating holder, and detectors on the ETEM, sample handling was kept to a minimum, and tracking the evolution of the same particle was abled. This allowed achieving high repeatability and having confidence that the observed changes were the result of underlying material mechanisms.57
To achieve stable in situ heating experiments, a micro-electro-mechanical-system heating substrates (pn: HTN-0101H) from Norcada Inc was used, shown in Figure S1A (Supporting Information). The MEMS substrates were mechanically coated with the sample as (Section S1, Supporting Information). The MEMS heating substrates were then fitted into a Hitachi Higher Technologies Gas Injection / Heating holder (shown in Figure 1), which provided voltage for heating and an injection port for gases during imaging. The holder was then inserted into the electron beam path inside the ETEM. Together, the ETEM, the holder, and the MEMs substrate provided a stable infrastructure for heating the sample up to 1200 °C.
The sample was then imaged, requiring a specific set of conditions for the studies. Each of the in situ tests required a sample with all three of the composite components intersecting inside the ≈2 µm viewing windows of the MEMS chip. The intersecting area also needed to be thin enough for high-resolution imaging. Each test was only run once on the MEMS substrate–as the GCSi sample evolved nonreversibly during heating. Each of the image sets and videos shown is for a new sample and location.
For all microscopy images, EDS elemental mapping (Bruker XFlash 6 | 60 EDS Detector) was performed before and after the experiments to confirm the observed elements. ETEM imaging was performed using a GATAN Orious TEM Camera, as well as scanning transmission electron microscopy using secondary electron (SE), a direct image of the cross section (BF) and dark field (DF) detectors. The TEM cameras provide an ultra-high-resolution image of a cross section of the sample. The SE detectors raster the beam across the sample and collect the generated electrons from the surface layer. This provides a high resolution, 3D, topographical analysis crucial for commenting on any potential surface reactions. The DF collects the diffracted signal by the sample generating a cross sectional image. The BF and DF images are sensitive to the elements present, and clearly show different elements with different brightness.
Acknowledgements
M.H.P. and A.D.S. contributed equally to this work. The authors acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (Award No. PGSD2-518773-2018) for their financial support of this project. All microscopy and characterization were performed at the Ontario Center for Characterization of Advanced Materials (OCCAM) at the University of Toronto. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Stas Dogel for their invaluable technical assistance with this project. The authors would also like to thank Hitachi High Technologies Canada, and Norcada Inc for their assistance with the in situ microscopy studies. Authors acknowledges Davidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University for their financial support in this project. Authors also, express their gratitude to the Office of Naval Research under NEPTUNE for supporting this work under the grant N00014-18-1-2397. Purdue authors thanks to NETZSCH company for MMC 274 Multi-Module Calorimeter with special technical support from Peter Ralbovsky and Peter Vichos. Funding information: NSERC, Funder One Department, Grant/Award Number: 123456, 123457 and 123458; Funder Two, Funder Two Department, Grant/Award Number: 123459; ONR-NEPTUNE, Grant/Award Number: N00014-18-1-2397.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Supporting Information
References