1 Introduction
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in acid media is a key reaction in energy conversion systems such as the proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC). Pt-based materials supported by graphitic carbon have been used as electrocatalysts on cathodes for the ORR due to their high activity. However, these catalysts are expensive and resource-constrained, so the further development of low-cost highly active nonprecious electrocatalysts for the ORR has remained active over the last several decades.1
For examples, transition metal chalcogenides, nitrides and oxides, and substitutional doping in carbon with different light elements (e.g., B, N, and P) have been widely studied because these materials not only are abundant on earth and low costs but also exhibit ORR activity.1-3 Since the pioneering research by Jasinski4 and Jahnke et al.5 nonprecious metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) catalysts have also attracted considerable attention as alternatives to Pt-based catalysts for the ORR on cathodes. M–N–C catalysts contain ORR active sites at which a metallic atom such as iron or cobalt (M) is coordinated to nitrogen (N) functionalized graphitic carbon (C), resulting in a high ORR activity in acidic conditions. Pyrolyzing a mixture of Fe or Co, nitrogen, and carbon precursors can effectively produce Fe–N–C or Co–N–C active sites on graphitic carbon, resulting in a high ORR activity.4-12 However, despite numerous studies, the ORR activity still requires further improvement to realize an alternative Pt-based catalyst.
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are graphene sheets rolled up into a cylindrical structure, and have a high surface area, high crystallinity, excellent electrical conductivity, and a high electrochemical corrosion resistance. Therefore, they have great potential as a supporting material for advanced catalysts. The doping of various elements into CNTs has been achieved using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and pyrolysis of mixture of various sources, and the resulting ORR activities have been vigorously investigated. Various types of metal-free doping into CNTs have been investigated, such as the substitutional doping of nitrogen,13, 14 boron,15 or phosphorus,16 or the codoping of nitrogen and phosphorus,16 sulfur and nitrogen,17 or boron and nitrogen.18 These metal-free doped CNTs exhibit a high ORR activity in alkaline media, and Dai and co-workers demonstrated a comparable performance to that of a Pt catalyst using nitrogen doped CNTs.13 Fe–N–C doped CNT catalysts even exhibited a superior ORR activity to that of a Pt-based catalyst.19, 20 Other metal-free doped and nonprecious metal doped carbon catalysts based on graphene or graphitic carbon also showed very high activities.21-23 However, these high catalytic performances were demonstrated in alkaline media, and the activity in acidic media was insufficient for practical PEMFC application.
Fe–N–C or Co–N–C doped CNT catalysts have received considerable attention because they exhibit a high ORR activity in acidic media. Composites modified by Fe or Co metal macrocycles or chelates as precursors to multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs) were prepared by polymerization and impregnation, and their pyrolysis produced catalytically active Fe–N–C or Co–N–C sites attached to the surface of individual MWCNTs.24-26 As another modification method, nanographene moieties covering the CNT outer wall were formed by the harsh chemical oxidation of MWCNTs. Subsequent ammonia pyrolysis treatment of the CNTs included Fe atoms required to grow the nanotube resulted in the formation of Fe–N nano-graphene (Fe–N–C) moieties on the individual CNT surfaces.27 The resultant ORR activity exhibited a half-wave potential of 0.76 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) in 0.1 m HClO4, and is currently among the most active Fe–N–C catalysts in acidic media. Although various approaches have been explored to enhance the ORR activity in acidic media, the resultant catalysts still suffer from limited activity, presumably due to low immobilization of the catalytic sites and complicated fabrication process. Further development, although challenging, is highly required.
In this work, we developed facile but abundant active Fe–N–C sites attached to a CNT catalyst by pyrolyzing iron phthalocyanine (FePc) molecules adsorbed on vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (VA-CNTs). Unlike conventional commercially available CNTs, VA-CNTs have a high specific surface area (≈1000 m2 g−1) and highly aligned interstitial pores.28, 29 The specific surface area of VA-CNTs is more than twice that of commercial CNTs, as represented by HiPco nanotubes (≈600 m2 g−1),30 which enables a large amount of catalytic Fe–N–C sites immobilization on individual VA-CNT surfaces. Furthermore, the aligned interstitial mesoporous structure should improve the power density of the PEMFC by enabling efficient O2, proton, and H2O mass transport,28 and this has been a challenging issue to resolve.10
Simple mixing of VA-CNTs and FePc produced FePc-wrapped VA-CNT composites due to their strong affinity through π–π interaction, and the subsequent pyrolysis efficiently converted the FePc adsorbates into catalytically active Fe–N–C structures on the VA-CNTs. This process enabled the easy fabrication of VA-CNT catalysts wrapped by Fe–N–C active sites (Figure 1). The resultant catalyst exhibited onset and half-wave potentials of ≈0.97 and 0.79 V versus RHE, respectively, in an oxygen-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 solution, demonstrating the highest ORR activity yet reported for an Fe–N–C CNT-based catalyst.
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Adsorption of iron(II) phthalocyanine (FePc) on a VA-CNT to yield an FePc/VA-CNT composite, and subsequent pyrolysis to yield the Fe–N–C/VA-CNT catalyst.
2 Results and Discussion
The morphologies and surface structures of the catalysts were evaluated using transmission electron microscope (TEM). Figure 2a shows representative TEM images of the Fe–N–C/VA-CNT, and the Fe–N–C/VA-CNTs were partially aggregated. In addition, bent VA-CNTs coated with atomically thin moieties are clearly observable, and the moieties varied in size, and almost all of the VA-CNT surfaces were homogeneously coated with the graphene-like moieties to a thickness of one or a few layers. TEM images of pristine VA-CNTs (Figure S2, Supporting Information) showed no covering of individual tube surfaces by such moieties. After pyrolysis of the composite, the Raman spectra originating from FePc disappeared, and only the D, G, and 2D-bands ascribed to the graphitic carbon materials were observed (Figure S5, Supporting Information). These results indicate that the observed wrapped moieties are nanosized graphene-like materials produced by pyrolysis of the FePc adsorbate. For comparison, Fe–N–C/SWCNT catalysts were also characterized. TEM images of an Fe–N–C/SWCNT catalyst showed a highly aligned and bundled SWCNT structure. Such bundling is common with conventional SWCNTs, and arises from van der Waals interactions between the highly crystalline tubes (Figure 2b). Unlike VA-CNTs, for bundled SWCNTs, the graphene-like moieties did not fully cover the individual SWCNT surface, but rather only a part of the surface. This suggests that strong bundle formation can prevent the moieties from fully covering the nanotubes. Alternatively, the resultant inhomogeneous coverage of the SWCNT by the moiety could be attributed to easier desorption of the FePc adsorbate from the SWCNT during pyrolysis due to the narrower tube diameter. The average diameters of the VA-CNTs and SWCNTs were ≈3.0 and 1.4 nm, respectively, so the curvature of the SWCNT was higher than that of the VA-CNT. This higher curvature could weaken the π–π interactions between the FePc and the SWCNT, resulting in easier desorption of FePc from the SWCNT surface during pyrolysis.
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Representative TEM images of the a) Fe–N–C/VA-CNT and b) Fe–N–C/SWCNT catalysts.
The surface areas and pore structures of the catalysts were investigated by N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms. The isotherm analysis for pristine SWCNT showed no hysteresis, whereas pristine VA-CNT showed a slight hysteresis (Figure S6, Supporting Information). The hysteresis can be attributed to the different filling and emptying processes of the mesopores by capillary condensation. These results indicate that the VA-CNT was mesoporous, whereas the SWCNT has any no mesoporous. The mesopore size distribution of the pristine VA-CNT was estimated via the Barrett–Joyer–Halenda (BJH) model using N2 desorption branch. A peak corresponding to a mesoporous structure with a characteristic size of 18.7 nm was observed (Figure S6, Supporting Information), which is almost consistent with interstitial porosity.28, 29 The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas were estimated to be 1100 and 406 m2 g−1 for pristine VA-CNT and SWCNT, respectively. It should be noted again that the low BET surface area of the SWCNTs can be attributed to bundle formation due to their high crystallinity and straight tubes, whereas VA-CNTs do not form bundles due to their low crystallinity and bent tubes.28 Similar analyses were conducted for the pyrolyzed carbon catalysts, and both catalysts showed obvious hysteresis, with pore size distribution peaks centered at 3.9 and 18.4 nm for Fe–N–C/VA-CNT, and 3.9 nm for Fe–N–C/SWCNT (Figure 3). These results indicate that the pyrolysis efficiently produces a smaller mesopores (3.9 nm) in both catalysts. Although further investigation is necessary, the formation of smaller mesopores in both catalysts can probably be attributed to partial aggregation of the nanotubes during pyrolysis. The weak broad peak related to an 18.4 nm pore size was also observed for only Fe–N–C/VA-CNT, and corresponds to the pristine interstitial pores (18.7 nm), indicating that the pristine mesopores remain, even after pyrolysis. The BET surface areas were estimated to be 504 and 382 m2 g−1 for the Fe–N–C/VA-CNT and Fe–N–C/SWCNT catalysts, respectively. The surface area of the Fe–N–C/VA-CNT was dramatically reduced to almost half that of the pristine VA-CNT, demonstrating the effect of the partial aggregation and abundant immobilization of the nanosized graphene-like moieties on individual tube surfaces, as shown in the TEM images in Figure 2a. Unlike the VA-CNT results, a slight decrease in the surface area of the Fe–N–C/SWCNT relative to pristine SWCNT was observed. This result suggests a few immobilizations of the moieties because of the low surface area and easy desorption of FePc molecules during pyrolysis due to their weaker interaction.
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of a) Fe–N–C/VA-CNT and b) Fe–N–C/SWCNT catalysts. The inset graphs show the BJH pore size distributions derived from N2 desorption.
To obtain further insight of N and Fe presences, the catalysts were characterized by XPS. In contrast to pristine carbon materials, both pyrolyzed carbon catalysts exhibited a N 1s peak and Fe 2p peak, which are both components of the catalytic site (Figure 4). The N 1s signal of FePc adsorbed on a carbon composite exhibits a single peak at 398.8 eV, which can be attributed to the nitrogen–carbon bonding state in FePc, as reported previously (Figure S7, Supporting Information).31 The pyrolysis resulted in a significant change in the N 1s signal for both catalysts, indicating the formation of different nitrogen–carbon bonding states in the samples. It is well known that four N 1s peaks are observed for pyrolyzed nitrogen-doped graphitic carbon materials, at ≈399, 400, 401, and 404 eV, which can be attributed to pyridinic, pyrrolic, quaternary, and oxide nitrogen species, respectively.32, 33 Peak deconvolution analysis of the N 1s spectra revealed that ≈40%, ≈20%, and ≈30% of the nitrogen atoms were in the form of pyridinic, pyrrolic, and quaternary N species for both catalysts (Table S1, Supporting Information). These results indicate that the N species fraction was independent of the supported carbon type. Since the pyridinic N species has a lone pair of electrons in the same plane as the aromatic ring and is able to coordinate various metal ions, it plays a significant role in the formation of Fe coordinate sites for Fe–N–C ORR active centers.34 The presence of ≈40% pyridinic N species of the nitrogen atoms for both catalysts indicates that the catalysts possess suitable Fe coordinate sites for Fe–N–C formation. Two Fe 2p peaks at ≈711 and 725 eV were also observed for both catalysts, and correspond to lower (Fe 2p3/2) and higher (Fe 2p1/2) energies due to spin-orbital splitting. Considering the nanosized graphene-like moieties observed in the TEM images, the presence of Fe and pyridinic N species in both catalysts strongly indicates the formation of Fe-coordinated pyridinic N-doped graphene-like moieties; that is, Fe–N–C structures on the sidewalls acting as ORR active centers. The relative atomic concentrations (atomic%) of several different atoms in the catalysts are given in Table S2 of the Supporting Information. The fraction of N and Fe in Fe–N–C/VA-CNT was larger than that in Fe–N–C/SWCNT, indicating abundant immobilization of Fe–N–C active sites.
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) N 1s and b) Fe 2p XPS spectra of the Fe–N–C/VA-CNT and Fe–N–C/SWCNT catalysts.
To evaluate the ORR activity of the catalysts, cyclic voltammetry (CV) and rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) measurements were carried out in acidic media. CV curves in an O2-saturated solution exhibited distinct ORR peaks at 0.78 and 0.72 V for Fe–N–C/VA-CNT and Fe–N–C/SWCNT, respectively (Figure 5a). The higher positive potential of the ORR peak for Fe–N–C/VA-CNT strongly suggests that Fe–N–C sites with higher activities were formed. Further investigation of the ORR activity was carried out using RRDE measurements in an O2-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 solution (Figure 5b). The onset potential at −1 μA cm−2 and half-wave potential (E1/2) of the Fe–N–C/VA-CNT catalyst were at 0.97 and 0.79 V, respectively. Both values were more positive than those of the Fe–N–C/SWCNT (0.89 and 0.71 V). The limiting current density at 0.4 V of Fe–N–C/VA-CNT (≈6 mA cm−2) was higher than that of Fe–N–C/SWCNT (≈4.3 mA cm−2). The current difference could have been caused by differences in factors such as the accessible Fe–N–C active sites and mass transport property.35 The electron transfer number per oxygen molecule was estimated by analyzing the ring and disk currents, and plotted as a function of potential (Figure 5c). The electron transfer number for Fe–N–C/VA-CNT remained between 3.92 and 3.98 for potentials ranging from 0.2 to 0.8 V. This indicates an H2O2 yield between 1% and 5%. The electron transfer number was higher than that of Fe–N–C/SWCNT (3.83 to 3.95) and was close to that of the Pt/C catalyst (≈4). Note that a 4-electron ORR is the desired reaction pathway for a PEMFC. Hence, the closeness of the observed value for Fe–N–C/VA-CNT to that of Pt/C indicates favorability for ORR catalyst.
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) CV curves of Fe–N–C/VA-CNT (blue) and Fe–N–C/CNT (red) catalysts in O2-saturated (solid) and Ar-saturated (dotted) 0.5 m H2SO4 solutions. b) RRDE curves of Fe–N–C/VA-CNT (blue) and Fe–N–C/CNT (red) catalysts in O2-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 solution. c) The number of electrons involved in ORR versus potential for the corresponding RRDE curves in (b). d) The half-wave potential as a function of the number of potential cycles in O2 or Ar-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 solution.
As mentioned in the introduction, highest ORR active CNT-based catalysts produced by harsh chemical method exhibited an onset potential and E1/2 of 0.89 and 0.76 V versus RHE, respectively, in O2-saturated 0.1 m HClO4 solution.27 Our VA-CNT based catalyst yielded higher positive onset potential (0.97 V) and E1/2 values (0.79 V) in O2-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 solution. In addition, the mass activity was also 7.0 A g−1 at 0.80 V, which is larger value compared to previous study (Table S3, Supporting Information). This is the highest ORR activity yet reported for a CNT-based catalyst in acidic media, and closely approaching that of a state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C catalyst.
The high ORR activity of Fe-N-C/VA-CNT can probably be attributed to higher active Fe-N-C formation. Previous spectroscopic analysis revealed that there are several kinds of Fe–N–C sites, and that an in-plane Fe–N4 center, which iron is bonded to four nitrogen atoms embedded in graphitic carbon, correlated to the 4-electron ORR, whereas a C–Fe–N2 center, which iron is bonded to two nitrogen atoms and one carbon atom, favors a 2-electron ORR that yields hydrogen peroxide.36
XPS analyses for both catalysts showed that atomic ratio of N and Fe was ≈4 (Table S2, Supporting Information), and that the pyridinic type nitrogen as Fe coordinate site was only 40% of the whole nitrogen (Table S1, Supporting Information). Such lack of pyridinic nitrogen strongly indicates that not only Fe–N4 and C–Fe–N2 centers but also excess Fe species were produced in the both catalysts. Actually, TEM measurements showed that a few Fe nanoparticles encapsulated into the thick graphitic shells still remained even after the acidic treatment in catalytic preparation process for the both catalysts because the thick shells prevent the dissolution of Fe by the treatment. Although it is difficult to identify these centers and estimate the ratio by XPS, the observed higher electron transfer number and positive potential of the ORR peak for Fe-N-C/VA-CNT suggest a higher concentration of the in-plane Fe–N4 centers than in Fe–N–C/SWCNT. Differences in tube curvature and crystallinity could have played a role in the selective Fe–N–C species formation. Another possible cause of the high ORR activity is the large BET surface area (≈500 m2 g−1) and efficient mass transport through the mesoporous structure.10, 35, 37, 38 The catalyst has a relatively large surface area, as previously reported for M–N–C catalysts,10, 12, 35 and two different sizes of mesopores (3.9 and 18.4 nm), as shown in Figure 3. The larger surface area and different-sized mesoporous channels probably enable efficient access of O2 and protons to and release of the generated water from the dense Fe–N–C active sites on individual VA-CNT surfaces, which would lead to a synergistic catalytic enhancement of the ORR.
To evaluate the electrochemical stability of the catalyst, accelerated durability tests were performed by cycling a rectangular potential between 0.6 (3 s) and 1.0 V (3 s) in an O2- or Ar-saturated medium at 25 °C. 10 000 continuous potential cycles had 16 (O2-sat.) and 11 mV (Ar-sat.) negative shifts of E1/2 for Fe–N–C/VA-CNT. Previous durability studies showed the negative shifts of E1/2 for heat-treated polyaniline-based Fe–N–C catalyst (10 mV in N2-sat. 0.5 m H2SO4 at 10 000 cycles,11 CNT-based Fe–N–C catalyst (11 mV in Ar-sat. and 17 mV in O2-sat. 0.1 m HClO4 at 8000 cycles,27 and Co–N–C catalyst (9 mV in O2-sat. 0.5 m H2SO4 at 10 000 cycles.35 These results are one of the best durability performance in previously reported any M–N–C catalysts in acid media. In comparison with these results, the durability of Fe–N–C/VA-CNT catalyst was comparable to the previous reported Fe–N–C catalysts while it was slightly inferior to the Co–N–C catalyst. Excellent durability of previously reported Co–N–C catalyst can probably be attributed to a low yield of hydrogen peroxide, which causes the active sites or the supporting carbon to corrode. The higher H2O2 yield (1%–5%) of the Fe–N–C/VA-CNT catalyst compared to that of the Co–Fe–C catalysts (0.7%–2.5%) result in the larger negative shift of E1/2. These results indicate that the durability could be improved by producing a large quantity of Fe–N4 center (4-electron ORR center) by further optimizing preparation.
3 Conclusion
In conclusion, a highly active ORR catalyst was successfully synthesized using VA-CNT, which is characterized by a more individually aligned structure and higher surface area than those of commercial CNTs. Pyrolysis of a FePc-wrapped VA-CNT composite easily produced dense catalytically active Fe–N–C sites on the tube surface. Electrochemical measurements in oxygen-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 solution demonstrated a high ORR activity (onset and half-wave potentials of ≈0.97 and 0.79 V vs RHE, respectively), a high selectivity (3.92 to 3.98 electron transfer number) and long-term electrochemical stability (16 mV negative shift of E1/2 after 10 000 cycles in O2-sat. acidic medium), which is the best ORR performance yet reported for a CNT-based catalyst. Higher catalytically active Fe–N–C formation and a quantity of Fe–N–C active sites on individual tubes contributed to the high ORR performance. Furthermore, the two differently sized mesoporous structures could also have enhanced the ORR activity through efficient mass transport to the Fe–N–C active sites. As mentioned in the introduction, it is high possibility that the highly aligned mesoporous structure of the catalyst enables easy mass transport, leading to a dramatic improvement of the power density of the PEMFC. Our next challenge is to fabricate a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) system and carry out detailed evaluations such as basic characteristic, deterioration behavior, and an influence mesoporous nature based on the alignment of VA-CNTs upon the power. The investigation is now in progress. Our VA-CNT based approach would serve as development and designing of highly active ORR electrocatalysts toward the realization of nonprecious cathodic catalysts for use in PEMFCs.
4 Experimental Section
Catalyst Preparation: A schematic of the fabrication process for a VA-CNT based catalyst is shown in Figure 1. VA-CNTs and commercially purchased conventional single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) were used as supporting carbon materials to examine the influence of carbon nature on ORR activity. The VA-CNTs were synthesized by CVD,39-42 as described in detail in the Supporting Information. Highly crystalline purified SWCNTs produced using an arc plasma jet method (SWNT SO-P), were purchased from Meijo Nano Carbon Co., Ltd. Each carbon material (4.0 mg) was dispersed in dichloromethane (5 mL), homogenized in an ice bath, and then the dispersed solution was dried. Iron(II) phthalocyanine (FePc) dispersed in CH2Cl2 solution was mixed, and the FePc-adsorbed carbon dispersed solutions were dried under vacuum, yielding FePc adsorbed on carbon composites (Figure S3, Supporting Information). The quantity of FePc added was adjusted to maximize the ORR activity for each carbon material. Fe–N–C/carbon catalysts (Fe–N–C/VA-CNT or Fe–N–C/SWCNT) were produced by pyrolyzing the composites at 900 °C for 1 h under Ar and dilute NH3/N2 gas flow. NH3 gas was introduced to promote nitrogen-doping in the nano-graphene produced on the tube surfaces under the pyrolysis process. The resulting powders were washed with 0.5 m H2SO4 at 80 °C for 15 h to remove residual Fe particles produced by the heating, and then thoroughly washed with MilliQ water. The powders were heated again to 900 °C for 1 h under Ar and dilute NH3 gas flow, yielding Fe–N–C coated carbon catalysts (see the Supporting Information). Commercially available Pt/C catalyst (TEC10E50E, 50 wt% Pt/C) was also purchased from TKK and analyzed.
Catalyst Characterization: TEM images were collected on a JEOL JEM-2100F microscope. Samples were prepared by dropping a dilute ethanol suspension of the catalyst onto a Cu grid, followed by drying at 60 °C for 24 h. The accelerating voltage was 200 kV. Raman spectra were recorded using a micro-Raman spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a 532 nm laser excitation source. The laser power was kept below 1 mW to avoid sample damage by laser-induced heating. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out using a JEOL JPS-9200 instrument with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV). N2 sorption measurements were performed at 77 K using a Yuasa Ionics Autosorb 6AG system. Pore size distributions were determined via the BJH method using N2 desorption branch. The method is a procedure for calculating pore size distribution from isotherms using the Kelvin model of pore filling. The resulting pore size distributions are defined as dV/d(log r), where V is the volume adsorbed and r is the pore diameter. Samples (≈20 mg) were first degassed by heating to 200 °C for 4 h at 1 Torr. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) measurements were conducted in an O2 or Ar-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 solution. A RHE and Pt wire were used as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. The Fe–N–C/carbon catalysts were loaded on a glassy carbon disk (0.6 mg cm−2) and used as the working electrode. RRDE measurements were recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a fixed rotation rate of 1600 rpm. The Pt ring disk was set to a potential of 1.2 V. A detailed description of these electrochemical experiments and their analysis is provided in the Supporting Information.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Inamori Foundation, the Iketani Science and Technology Foundation, the Japan Science and Technology Agency, PRESTO, and a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (Grant No. 15K05465) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan.
Supporting Information
References