1 Introduction
Electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 into carbon-based chemicals and fuels represents an intriguing approach for mitigating the environmental and energy issues, especially when integrated with renewable energy.[1-4] Developing highly efficient catalysts is still of significant importance. A desirable electrocatalyst for CO2 conversion should be highly active, selective, and stable towards targeted products at low overpotential. To this end, numerous advanced electrocatalysts, such as nanostructured metals, metal oxides, and single-atom-based materials, have been exploited and applied for CO2 reduction.[5-10] Among them, single-metal species decorated N-rich carbon (M-NC) materials are highly appealing due to their unusual electronic properties, high atom utilization efficiency and excellent performance for different electrocatalytic applications.[11-16] Typically, the discrete Ni–Nx moieties supported on NC materials have demonstrated considerable activity for electrochemical CO2 reduction but still require further improvement.[17-21]
Apart from the local electronic structure of the metal centers,[22-25] the number of accessible active centers and mass transfer characteristics play critical roles in the final activity of M-NC catalysts.[26, 27] But only a small fraction of isolated metal sites can be regarded as active sites for most M-NC catalysts fabricated using the pyrolysis method.[27, 28] One of the main reasons for this drawback is that many single-metal sites are buried in the dense carbon framework or hosted in the inaccessible micropores. These unavailable sites will not be involved in the catalytic reaction. For example, ZIF-8, a typical zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF), has been widely used for preparing M-NC catalysts.[29] Unfortunately, the resulting dense carbon framework impedes the mass transfer and blocks many metal sites.[27, 30] Therefore, it is highly desirable to unleash the active sites for more efficient catalysis by rational structural design.
A favorable architecture of catalysts, featuring 3D open structures, mesopores, or hollow space, holds the potential to enhance the mass transfer and increase the number of available single-atom moieties. These advantages will eventually enhance the apparent activity of single-atom catalysts. Some advanced carbon-based architectures modified with single-atom sites have been constructed for efficient catalytic reactions.[26, 27, 30-33] For instance, mesoporous NC materials loaded with single-Co or single-Fe centers have been prepared using a SiO2 coating strategy and exhibit enhanced oxygen reduction performance.[26, 27] These studies highlight the critical role of spatial structure in the activity of single-atom catalysts. Exploring novel approaches towards unique architectures is highly promising for maximizing the performance of single-atom catalysts but remains as a challenge.
In this work, a zeolitic tetrazolate framework (ZTF) possessing dual linkers is developed as the precursor for fabricating assembled hollow plates (AHP) of N-rich carbon (NC), thereafter designated as NC(AHP). A schematic of this facile synthetic strategy is presented in Figure 1. First, novel assembled plates (AP) of ZTF (designated as ZTF(AP)) are prepared by employing both 2-methylimidazole (2-Mim) and 5-aminotetrazole (5-AT) as linkers and zinc ions as nodes in a methanol media. Interestingly, the 5-AT ligand in ZTF(AP) is easily decomposable during a pyrolysis process thus can serve as a template for generating some hollow structures. The ZTF(AP) sample undergoes a pyrolysis process to produce NC(AHP). In the last step, single-Ni atoms are then loaded on NC(AHP) to produce Ni-NC(AHP) catalyst by annealing with Ni salt and ammonium chloride.[25] The 3D open structure of Ni-NC(AHP) not only improves the mass transfer but also more importantly exposes the single-Ni sites, which serve as the active sites for CO2 activation and conversion. As a result, the Ni-NC(AHP) catalyst demonstrates excellent CO2 electroreduction performance with nearly 100% selectivity towards CO within a wide potential range, about three times higher CO partial current density relative to the control sample, as well as good stability.
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Schematic illustration of the preparation route for Ni-NC(AHP).
2 Results and Discussion
The morphology of ZTF(AP) was examined by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). ZTF(AP) presents a micro-sized spherical superstructure assembled by solid nanoplates (Figures S1 and S2, Supporting Information) and possesses a Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 343.8 m2 g−1 (Figure S3, Supporting Information). For comparison, we also prepared two other samples, one ZTF sample with the 5-AT linker only, and the other ZIF-8 sample with 2-Mim linker only. Distinct from ZTF(AP), the ZTF sample exhibits a nanosheet morphology (Figure S4, Supporting Information) without the assembled structure. Both ZTF(AP) and ZTF show very similar X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns which are quite different from that of ZIF-8 (Figure 2a). This result suggests that a new coordination structure between linkers and zinc nodes forms for ZTF and ZTF(AP). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was further conducted to verify whether the 2-Mim ligand exists in ZTF(AP). The FTIR spectrum of ZTF(AP) is comparable to that of ZTF (Figure 2b), further implying that they share the same main framework. Notably, ZTF(AP) also exhibits some weak characteristic FTIR signals belonging to ZIF-8.[34, 35] For example, both the peaks of Zn-N species in ZIF-8 (422.3 cm–1) and ZTF (490.3 cm–1) are observed for ZTF(AP), which indicates that both 2-Mim and 5-AT are successfully integrated into ZTF(AP) via the coordination with Zn nodes (one possible linkage model is provided in bottom left of Figure 1). The analyses of XRD and FTIR reveal that 5-AT is the primary ligand for forming the framework of ZTF(AP) while 2-Mim is a low content dopant. This point is further supported by the elemental analysis of samples (Figure S5, Supporting Information).
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Characterizations of ZTF(AP), NC(AHP), and related references. a) XRD patterns, b) FTIR spectra, and c) TGA curves of samples in N2 atmosphere. d,e) FESEM images and f) TEM image of NC(AHP). The dash circles in (e) indicate the openings of hollow plates.
The pyrolysis of the linkers (Figure S6, Supporting Information) and the as-prepared samples was clearly monitored by thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) in N2 atmosphere (Figure 2c). Similar to ZTF, ZTF(AP) starts to degrade at about 247 °C and presents a dramatic weight loss of about 31% at around 373 °C. In contrast, ZIF-8 is thermally more stable with a decomposition temperature of about 558 °C, much higher than that of ZTF(AP). The total weight loss of ZTF(AP) reaches 97.1 wt% at 1000 °C, far exceeding 70.5 wt% of ZIF-8. These results imply that ZTF(AP) is easily decomposable because of the unstable 5-AT linker, which would generate gaseous products during pyrolysis.
After the carbonization process at 900 °C, ZTF(AP) was converted into NC(AHP). The XRD pattern of NC(AHP) shows a broad peak located at about 25.0° (Figure S7a, Supporting Information), corresponding to the (002) plane of graphitic carbon. Its Raman spectrum exhibits two characteristic signals of carbon with defects, i.e., the D band at 1343 cm–1 and G band at 1594 cm–1 (Figure S8, Supporting Information).[36] After the pyrolysis, the morphology is almost unaltered. The obtained NC(AHP) product appears as micro-sized spheres assembled by nanoplates (Figure 2d–f; Figures S9–S11, Supporting Information). Interestingly, each individual plate becomes hollow after the pyrolysis process. This feature can be identified by the openings on the broken plates observed in FESEM images (Figure 2e; Figure S9c,d, Supporting Information) and some parallel walls of plates found in TEM image (Figure S10b, Supporting Information). The N2 sorption curves of NC(AHP) exhibit typical type-IV isotherms (Figure S12a, Supporting Information),[32] from which the BET surface area and pore volume are calculated to be 284.3 m2 g–1 and 0.73 cm3 g–1, respectively. Importantly, NC(AHP) is rich in mesopore as revealed by the pore size distribution (Figure S12b, Supporting Information), which should mainly stem from the interior space of hollow plates and the stacked space of adjacent plates. The abundant open space of NC(AHP) could maximize the exposure of single-atom sites and enhance mass transfer, which is beneficial for improving the electrocatalytic activity as shown below.
With the above observations, the formation mechanism of the hollow plates in NC(AHP) is proposed. During the pyrolysis, the dominant 5-AT linker in ZTF(AP) is gradually decomposed into gases, which will escape from the plates and result in the formation of hollow cavities. Meanwhile, the 2-Mim linker is largely carbonized into the NC material while forming the hollow plates, which is consistent with the well-known fact of formation of NC materials from carbonization of ZIF-8.[29] Moreover, it is interesting to find that the presence of the 2-Mim linker in ZTF(AP) has played another important role in preventing the formation of other noncarbon solid products from the 5-AT linker under thermal annealing. Without the 2-Mim linker, pyrolysis of the ZTF sample under the same conditions leads to formation of a distinct Zn(CN2) compound with a nearly white color (Figure S7b, Supporting Information).
According to the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) result, the obtained NC(AHP) possesses a high N content of up to 12.5 at%. The high-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum of NC(AHP) can be deconvoluted into four types of N species (Figure S13a, Supporting Information), including pyridinic-N (398.5 eV), pyrrolic-N (399.9 eV), graphitic-N (401.1 eV) and oxidized-N (402.4 eV).[37] The N species could provide rich anchor sites for stabilizing the Ni centers.[38] As expected, the resultant Ni-NC(AHP) sample shows the same morphological features as NC(AHP), which is confirmed by the typical FESEM (Figure 3a–c) and TEM images (Figure 3d–f; Figure S14, Supporting Information). Some openings (Figure 3c) and parallel walls on a single plate (Figure 3f) can be observed. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image presents some typical fringes of layered carbon matrix (Figure 3g), which possesses considerable electronic conductivity for transferring electrons to the single-Ni centers for the subsequent reactions. The energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy elemental mappings reveal that Ni, N, and C are uniformly distributed across the entire framework (Figure 3h). Aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) was further carried out to directly track the Ni species at the atomic scale (Figure 3i). The bright spots (≈0.2 nm) indicate the existence of atomically dispersed Ni sites, which are well distributed on the NC substrate. The Ni content in Ni-NC(AHP) is about 1.6 wt% according to the inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) result.
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Electron microscopy characterizations of Ni-NC(AHP). a–c) FESEM images. d–f) Low-magnification TEM images. g) HRTEM image. h) dark-field TEM image and EDX elemental mapping images. i) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image. The dash circles in (c) and lines in (f) indicate the openings and parallel walls of hollow plates, respectively.
The chemical composition and valence state of Ni-NC(AHP) were examined using XPS and X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy characterizations. The binding energy of Ni species in Ni-NC(AHP) is 855.5 eV for Ni 2p3/2 (Figure 4a), located between those of Ni0 and Ni2+ and thus implying the presence of Niδ+ centers (0 < δ < 2) in Ni-NC(AHP).[39] The high-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum shows that a new peak at 399.4 eV appears after incorporating single-Ni species (Figure S13a, Supporting Information). This new peak could be assigned to the bonding between pyridinic N and the Ni sites,[37, 39] likely Ni–Nx in Ni-NC(AHP). As seen from Ni K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra (Figure 4b), the absorption edge of Ni-NC(AHP) is located between those of Ni foil and NiO. This result suggests that the oxidation state of the single-Ni species in Ni-NC(AHP) is between 0 and +2, in accordance with the above analysis of the Ni 2p XPS spectrum.
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Compositional characterizations of Ni-NC(AHP) and Ni-NC(MP). a) Ni 2p XPS spectra. b) Ni K-edge XANES spectra of as-prepared samples and references. c) Fourier transformed curves of Ni K-edge EXAFS spectra. d) Ni K-edge EXAFS fitting result of Ni-NC(AHP), inset shows the proposed coordination configuration of the Ni center.
More detailed structural information of Ni species in Ni-NC(AHP) can be obtained from the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy analysis (Figure 4c,d; Figure S15, Supporting Information). The Fourier transformed Ni K-edge EXAFS spectrum of Ni-NC(AHP) shows a prominent peak at about 1.35 Å in the region from 1 to 2 Å (Figure 4c), close to the previously reported value from Ni–N bonds for the single-Ni modified carbon-based catalysts.[17] No obvious signals of Ni–Ni bonds at about 2.10 Å is found for Ni-NC(AHP), indicating the absence of metallic Ni nanoparticles. EXAFS wavelet transform (WT) analysis is carried out to further confirm the atomic dispersion of Ni species on Ni-NC(AHP). WT analysis of Ni-NC(AHP) detects only one intensity maximum at ≈3.4 Å–1 (Figure S16, Supporting Information), which could be assigned to the Ni–N contribution.[40] These results corroborate the atomic dispersion of Ni sites in NC(AHP) as observed in the HAADF-STEM image (Figure 3i). The coordination information of Ni sites in Ni-NC(AHP) is further obtained by EXAFS curve fitting analysis (Figure 4d; Table S1, Supporting Information). The fitting result confirms that the coordination number of Ni–N bonds is around four, indicating a Ni–N4 configuration for Ni centers in the Ni-NC(AHP) catalyst.[41]
To verify the structural advantages of Ni-NC(AHP) for maximizing the activity of single-Ni species, we also prepared single-Ni species loaded NC microparticles (designated as Ni-NC(MP)) as a reference sample. NC microparticles (NC(MP)) were prepared starting from ZIF-8 particles with morphology well retained (Figure S17, Supporting Information). After loading with Ni species, the obtained Ni-NC(MP) sample also retains the same morphology (Figure S18, Supporting Information). The NC(MP) sample possesses a high specific surface area of 560.3 m2 g–1 and small-sized mesopores (Figure S19, Supporting Information). The high specific surface area mainly originates from the rich micropores and mesopores within the carbon framework.[42, 43] In addition, the types of N species and their contents in NC(MP) are similar to those of NC(AHP) (Figure S13, Supporting Information). Ni-NC(MP) and Ni-NC(AHP) show similar XPS binding energy (Figure 4a) and nearly identical Ni K-edge XANES spectra (Figure 4b), which implies that the Ni species in both samples possesses comparable valence state. Fourier transformed EXAFS curves and the corresponding EXAFS fitting results further confirm that the Ni species in these two samples owns the same atomic coordination structure, namely, Ni–N4 moiety (Figure 4c; Figure S20 and Table S1, Supporting Information). Therefore both samples of Ni-NC(MP) and Ni-NC(AHP) have similar chemical compositions and single-Ni sites but are very different in architecture. This will allow us to fairly conclude the contribution of spatial structure to the apparent electrocatalytic activity of electrocatalysts.
We then evaluated the CO2 electroreduction performance of the as-obtained samples in CO2-saturated 0.5 m KHCO3 solution using a gas-tight H-cell.[6] As illustrated in Figure 5a, the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves show that the cathodic current of Ni-NC(AHP) rises rapidly when the applied potential is lower than −0.6 V (versus reversible hydrogen electrode (vs RHE)). In comparison, the NC(AHP) and Ni-NC(MP) show much lower current density within the same potential range. It suggests considerably higher CO2 electroreduction activity of Ni-NC(AHP) relative to the other two samples. To confirm this point and analyze the generated products and their Faradaic efficiency (FE), we recorded the typical current profiles at various potentials (Figure S21, Supporting Information). The related products were quantitatively analyzed by gas chromatography. For Ni-NC(AHP) and Ni-NC(MP), the total FE of gaseous CO and H2 reaches about 100% at the potentials lower than −0.7 V (vs RHE), suggesting the exclusive production of CO and H2 (Figure S22, Supporting Information). The Ni-NC(AHP) electrocatalyst demonstrates high selectivity towards CO production. The FE of CO reaches 71.5% at a moderate potential of −0.6 V versus RHE (Figure 5b). Notably, a FE of about 100% is realized in a wide potential window from −0.7 to −1.0 V (vs RHE). Interestingly, the calculated FE is slightly higher than 100% at lower potentials for example −1.0 V (vs RHE). This should be attributed to the experimental errors especially from the gas chromatography measurement.[44, 45] Also, a considerably higher partial current density of CO is obtained for Ni-NC(AHP) at various potentials (Figure 5c). For example, the Ni-NC(AHP) electrocatalyst delivers a current density of 14.5 mA cm–2 towards CO at −0.9 V (vs RHE). Overall, the Ni-NC(AHP) electrocatalyst manifests superior CO2 reduction activity, in comparison with many previously reported advanced single-atom catalysts (Table S2, Supporting Information). In order to validate the generation of CO originating from the catalytic CO2 reduction process, isotopic 13CO2 and H13CO3– are simultaneously employed as the substitute source to trace the carbon sources in the electrocatalytic CO2 reduction for the Ni-NC(AHP) sample. The obtained products are identified by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). The GC peak at 7.2 min (Figure S23a, Supporting Information), corresponding to m/z = 29 in MS (Figure S23b, Supporting Information), is assigned to the generated 13CO. This result confirms that the produced CO originates from CO2 and HCO3– rather than Ni-NC(AHP) itself, which is in agreement with the related study.[46, 47]
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
CO2 electroreduction performance of samples. a) LSV curves in CO2-saturated 0.5 m KHCO3 solution. b) Comparison of CO Faradaic efficiency at various potentials. c) Comparison of CO partial current density at various potentials. d) Tafel plots towards CO product. e) Long-term stability test of Ni-NC(AHP) for CO2 reduction operated at −0.7 V (vs RHE).
The Ni-NC(MP) electrocatalyst also exhibits high FE towards CO, which is comparable to that of Ni-NC(AHP) (Figure 5b). The close FE between these two catalysts is ascribed to the similar active centers, i.e., Ni-N4 species. The atomically dispersed Ni-N4 sites mainly account for the conversion of CO2 to CO. This point is further supported by the poor CO selectivity for NC(AHP) without Ni species loaded (Figure 5b). Significantly, the Ni-NC(AHP) electrocatalyst delivers a high CO partial current density and turnover frequency about 3 times that of Ni-NC(MP) at various potentials (Figure 5c; Figures S24 and S25, Supporting Information). These two samples have similar single-Ni sites, and their Ni content analyzed by ICP-OES is almost the same (1.6 wt%). Therefore, the much higher activity of Ni-NC(AHP) might be ascribed to the unique structure, highlighting the critical role of the support structure in electrocatalysis. Specifically, the open structure with hollow space in Ni-NC(AHP) contributes to large surface area for exposing more accessible single-Ni sites and at the same time facilitates the mass transport.
The electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of these two samples was then estimated using the double-layer capacitance (Cdl) to confirm their available surface area during the electrocatalytic process.[5, 19] The Cdl of Ni-NC(AHP) is about 8.79 mF cm–2 which is 1.7 times higher that of Ni-NC(MP) (Cdl = 5.08 mF cm–2) (Figure S26, Supporting Information). The higher ECSA in Ni-NC(AHP) should stem from the highly exposed active sites associated with the open structure of Ni-NC(AHP). In addition to the increased ECSA in Ni-NC(AHP), the enhanced mass transfer brought by the open structure might also partly account for the about three times higher apparent activity of Ni-NC(AHP) relative to Ni-NC(MP). Moreover, the microcavities of hollow plates in Ni-NC(AHP) might also boost the electrocatalytic performance to some extent by confining the reactants.[48, 49]
Furthermore, the Ni-NC(AHP) electrocatalyst has a Tafel slope of 101 mV dec–1, much smaller than 127 mV dec–1 of Ni-NC(MP) (Figure 5d), implying the faster kinetics towards the generation of CO over Ni-NC(AHP). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was further performed (Figure S27, Supporting Information). Ni-NC(AHP) possesses a smaller charge transfer resistance than Ni-NC(MP), suggesting a faster charge-transfer process occurring on Ni-NC(AHP) for CO2 reduction.[19] The long-term CO2 reduction test was operated at −0.7 V (vs RHE) on the Ni-NC(AHP) catalyst. The current density shows a slight decay, and the FE of CO maintains well during the continuous test (Figure 5e), verifying the good stability of Ni-NC(AHP). The architecture, as well as the chemical state of Ni and N, remains almost unchanged after the long-term CO2 reduction operation for Ni-NC(AHP) (Figures S28 and S29, Supporting Information), further confirming the excellent electrocatalytic stability.
3 Conclusion
In summary, we have prepared a highly open N-rich carbon (NC) microstructure assembled by hollow nanoplates by carbonizing a ZTF precursor with dual linkers. Single-Ni atoms are loaded on this advantageous NC structure to form a highly active electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction. The obtained Ni-NC(AHP) catalyst possesses a highly open structure with large accessible surface area, which exposes numerous single-Ni sites and allows for fast mass transport of reactants. As a result, the Ni-NC(AHP) electrocatalyst delivers excellent CO2 reduction performance with nearly 100% CO selectivity in a wide potential window and dramatically enhanced CO partial current density. This work would inspire the exploration of unique carbon-based supports for high-performance single-atom catalysts.
Acknowledgements
X.W.L. acknowledges the funding support from the Ministry of Education of Singapore through the Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier-2 grants (MOE2017-T2-2-003; MOE2019-T2-2-049). The authors thank Dr. Shibo Xi and the X-ray absorption fine structure for catalysis (XAFCA) beamline of the Singapore Synchrotron Light Source (SSLS) for supporting the XAFS measurements. The authors thank Dr. Shengyao Wang from Huazhong Agricultural University for the help in the GC-MS test.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Open Research
Supporting Information
References