1 Introduction
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) plays an essential role in many energy conversion and storage devices including fuel cells and metal–air batteries. Device performance in these applications relies heavily on the efficiency of ORR electrocatalysts.[1] Pt-based catalysts currently offer the best all-round performance attributes for the ORR, though the high cost and modest durability of Pt-based catalysts are obstacles to their sustainable utilization across the energy sector.[2] In recent years, heterogeneous single-atom catalysts (SACs) with M–Nx sites (M = Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) on carbon supports have emerged as promising ORR catalysts.[3] SACs have the key advantages of a high metal atom utilization efficiency (theoretically ≈100%), high intrinsic activity, and low cost.[4] Among M–Nx/C catalysts with different metal centers, Fe–N4/C catalysts deliver the best ORR activity.[5] However, the activity of Fe–N4 sites is still not optimal, owing to the adsorption energies of oxygen intermediates formed during ORR being slightly too strong.[6] Therefore, optimizing the bonding between the ORR intermediates and the Fe–N4 sites is a rational approach for boosting ORR electrocatalysis over Fe–N4/C materials.
Modulating the occupancy of d-orbitals in Fe–N4 sites affects the adsorption energies of the ORR intermediates. The energy levels of d-orbital in the Fe–N4 sites are sensitive to the Fe valence state and the local coordination geometry of Fe.[7] Recently, strategies such as coordination number regulation,[8] heteroatom doping,[9] and carbon support defect engineering[10] have been used to tune the d-orbitals (and d-band center position) of Fe cations in Fe–N4/C catalysts, thus allowing marked improvements in ORR activity. These approaches seek to break the square planar symmetry of Fe–N4 sites (by elongating Fe–N bond lengths or moving the Fe center slightly out the N4 plane), thus reducing the adsorption energy of ORR intermediates. Axial charge redistribution of the Fe centers is particularly effective for regulating the binding strengths between Fe–N4/C catalysts and ORR intermediate species, since Fe–O bonding between ORR intermediates and Fe–N4 sites involves orbital overlap in the axial direction with respect to the Fe–N4 plane.[11] Some recent experimental and computational studies have suggested that Fe–N4 sites with an axial ligand (XA, such as OH, Cl, F, Br) show enhanced ORR activity.[5, 12] However, owing to the ionic nature of the bonding of these axial ligands with Fe–N4 sites, loss of the axial ligands will occur readily during the ORR.[13] To this end, achieving a stable axial charge redistribution at Fe–N4 sites is of tremendous fundamental and practical significance. If this could be achieved, step-change improvements in the ORR activity of Fe–N4/C catalysts should be possible.
Herein, we developed a novel interface engineering strategy to construct Fe–N–C catalysts in which Fe–N4 sites were modulated by axial (subsurface) Fe–O bonds. We first prepared O,N-codoped carbon-rods (denoted as O–NCR), which were then functionalized with surface Fe–N4 sites using a microwave-assisted pyrolysis method. The synthesis method formed stable FeN4–O–NCR heterostructures. The obtained catalyst, denoted herein as FeN4–O–NCR, featured a hierarchically porous architecture, high specific surface area (1159 m2 g−1) and an abundance of FeN4–O active sites for optimized oxygen adsorption and activation. The obtained FeN4–O–NCR catalyst exhibited remarkable ORR activity and stability in alkaline media (Eonset, 1.050 V; E1/2, 0.942 V; Jk 39.56 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V), state-of-the art performance for a SAC. A primary Zn–air battery constructed using FeN4–O–NCR as the cathode catalyst delivered a very high-power density (214.2 mW cm−2), greatly surpassing the performance of a battery constructed using a commercial Pt/C catalyst (104.2 mW cm−2) or other recently reported single-atom catalysts. The merits of FeN4–O–NC were probed by theoretical density functional theory (DFT) calculations, wherein the precise tailoring of the d-orbital electronic structure of Fe cations was found to reduce the thermodynamic barrier for ORR. Results confirm that axial ligand regulation is an effective strategy for fine-tuning metal single-atom sites for optimal electrocatalytic activity.
2 Results and Discussion
The synthesis route adopted in the current work for the preparation of the heterostructured FeN4–O–NCR catalyst involved the preparation of O,N-doped carbon nanorods (O–NCR) from a MOF-74 precursor, followed by electrostatic adsorption of an Fe-phenanthroline (Fe-Phen) complex then a rapid microwave-assisted carbonization step (Figure 1a).[14] First, rod-shaped MOF-74 (MOF-74-Rod) crystals were synthesized by reaction of zinc acetate and 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid in the presence of salicylic acid as a shape modulator.[15] Transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Figure S1, Supporting Information) showed the rod-shaped MOF-74 crystals to have a high aspect ratio (≈40 nm wide and 200–400 in length). Carbonization of MOF-74-Rod at 1 000 °C in an argon flow yielded 1D carbon nanorods (CR). The carbon nanorods inherited the high aspect ratio of the MOF-74-Rod precursor, though with obvious reductions in all dimensions (≈20 nm in width and 200–30 nm in length) (Figure S2, Supporting Information). In addition, the high-temperature carbonization process introduced mesopores in the surface of the carbon rods. Heteroatom doping of CR utilized a molten salt (KOH)-assisted pyrolysis strategy in an NH3 atmosphere, yielding O,N–doped carbon nanorods (O–NCR) with a porous surface and unsaturated/edge-hosted N–C sites (Figure S3, Supporting Information). In the final stage of FeN4–O–NCR synthesis, a Fe-Phen complex was electrostatically adsorbed onto the O–NCR support, after which a rapid high-temperature microwave-assisted pyrolysis treatment was performed for 10 s in Ar gas. A control catalyst using CR as a support for Fe–N4 sites was also obtained by the same general procedure (denoted herein as FeN4/CR, Figure S4, Supporting Information). The adsorption of the Fe–Phen complex on O–NCR was monitored by Zeta potential measurements. Zeta potentials measured at pH 7 for the Fe–Phen complex (+35.66 mV) and O–NCR (Zeta potential of −7.56 mV) implied that the positively charged complex would adsorb on the negative charged O–NCR. The obtained composite (O–NCR@Fe–Phen) possessed a Zeta potential +0.58 mV (Figure S5, Supporting Information), confirming the successful adsorption of the Fe–Phen complex on the O–NCR surface. In comparison, the adsorption capacity of CR to Fe–Phen is weak as the zeta potential of CR@Fe–Phen was similar to that of Fe–Phen. The size and morphology of FeN4–O–NCR product obtained after the microwave-assisted pyrolysis of O–NCR@Fe–Phen were comparable to those of the O–NCR support (Figure S6, Supporting Information).
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the FeN4–O–NCR catalyst. b) SEM image and c,d) TEM images at low magnification (c) and high magnification (d) for FeN4–O–NCR. e) BET surface areas, micropore surface areas (calculated from pores of diameter <2 nm) and external surface areas (calculated by subtracting the micropore surface areas from the BET surface areas), and f) pore size distribution curves for FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, O–NCR, and CR. g) Raman spectra for FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, O–NCR, and CR.
The morphology and pore structure of FeN4–O–NCR were characterized by various techniques. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging showed FeN4–O–NCR to be composed of nanorods (Figure 1b). TEM imaging revealed that the nanorods were interconnected and possessed a high aspect ratio (Figure 1c). High-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) showed that the individual nanorods contained abundant mesopores (≈4 nm in size) that were expected to ensure good mass transport during ORR and offer abundant edge sites for hosting Fe–N4 (Figure 1d). Nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherms were collected to determine the BET surface area and pore sizes in FeN4–O–NCR and other reference samples. FeN4–O–NCR exhibited a type-IV isotherm with a well-defined adsorption–desorption hysteresis loop at higher relative pressures (Figure S7a,b, Supporting Information), confirming a hierarchical microporous/mesoporous structure similar to the O–NCR support.[16] The hysteresis loops for FeN4/CR and CR were smaller, indicating the KOH-assisted thermal ammonolysis N-doping step used to create O–NCR from CR introduced micropores (Figure S7c,d, Supporting Information).[17] FeN4–O–NCR possessed a BET specific surface area of 1159 m2 g−1, comprising an external surface area of 677 m2 g−1 and a micropore area of 483 m2 g−1 (Figure 1e). The specific surface area of FeN4/CR (1007 m2 g−1) was significantly lower than that of FeN4–O–NCR mainly due to the smaller external surface area (Table S1, Supporting Information). The pore size distribution curves in Figure 1f confirmed that micropores and mesopores with pore diameters of ≈0.6–1.8 nm and ≈2.6–4.4 nm, respectively, coexisted in FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, O–NCR, and CR. FeN4–O–NCR was richer in micropores and mesopores than FeN4/CR, which was expected to create more active sites, facilitate mass transport and promote the utilization of active sites during ORR.[18] The micropore surface areas for FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR were both ≈25% lower than those of the corresponding O–NCR and CR supports, respectively (Table S1, Supporting Information). This implies that the Fe single atoms were likely located in the micropores, leading to a reduction in micropore volumes, micropore surface areas, and specific surface areas after FeN4 hosting. After functionalization with Fe single atoms, the external surfaces areas for both FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR were increased slightly compared to values for the corresponding bare supports, which is again consistent with Fe occupancy of micropores. Further, carbonization of the adsorbed Fe-Phen complex (i.e., Fe(o-phen)33+) to create the FeN4-O and FeN4 sites on in FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/C, respectively, is expected to generate additional N-doped carbon debris, which may also have contributed to the slight increase in external surface area after the introduction of the Fe single atoms. Raman spectra (Figure 1g) for the same samples showed the characteristic disordered D-band (1335 cm−1) and graphitic carbon-related G-band (1580 cm−1) signals.[19] The ID/IG ratio for O–NCR (0.97) was slightly higher than that of CR (0.95), suggesting that the KOH-assisted thermal ammonolysis treatment created defects (likely in-plane holes and C–N edge sites). The FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR samples had the same ID/IG ratio (0.99), suggesting a similar carbon network structure after hosting FeN4 moieties.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for the FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, O–NCR, and CR samples contained two broad peaks centered around 25° and 44° (Figure S8, Supporting Information), readily attributable to the (002) and (101) reflections of graphitized carbon. No Fe nanoparticles, Fe oxide phases, or Fe carbide phases were detected for the FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR samples. Aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM, Figure 2a) showed that Fe in FeN4–O–NCR was atomically dispersed over the O–NCR support. Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping images confirmed that C, N, O, and Fe were distributed uniformly in FeN4–O–NCR (Figure 2b). Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) determined that the Fe loading in FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR were similar (0.89 and 0.92 wt.%, respectively, Table S2, Supporting Information). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to investigate the near-surface region chemical composition and element speciation in the samples. FeN4–O–NCR possessed a higher N content (1.39 at.%) than FeN4/CR (0.73 at.%), which was expected due to the prenitridation of the carbon support in FeN4–O–NCR. High-resolution N 1s XPS spectra for the samples showed the presence of four peaks, which were readily assigned to pyridinic N (398.3–398.6 eV), pyrrolic N (400.1 eV), graphitic N (401.5 eV), and N-oxide (403.1 eV) species (Figure 2c).[20] The N 1s XPS spectra for CR showed no obvious signals, as was expected since CR sample did not contain nitrogen (Figure S9, Supporting Information). The pyridinic N peaks for FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR were at slightly higher binding energy compared with the pyridinic-N peak for O–NCR, suggesting that Fe coordination involved the formation of Fe-pyridinic N bonds.[21] The smaller shift in the pyridinic N peak position for FeN4–O–NCR compared with FeN4/CR suggested a slightly different coordination environment of Fe atoms. In the O 1s XPS spectrum of FeN4–O–NCR, an additional peak was seen ≈530 eV due to Fe–O bond formation (Figure S10a,b, Supporting Information), which was conspicuously absent in the O 1s spectrum of FeN4/CR. The data for FeN4–O–NCR thus implied that Fe sites in the sample contained both Fe–N and Fe–O bonding.[22] The Fe 2p XPS spectra for FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR showed no obvious Fe signals (Figure S10c,d, Supporting Information). This is attributed to the Fe loadings in the samples being very low (<1 wt.%, i.e., at the detection limits of the technique) and XPS only probing the near surface region (top few nanometers) in the samples.
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) AC HAADF-STEM images for FeN4–O–NCR. The Fe atoms are marked by the red circles, and the pore edges of graphene are marked by the orange dashed lines. b) HAADF-TEM image and corresponding element mapping images for FeN4–O–NCR. c) High-resolution N 1s XPS spectra for FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, and O–NCR. d) Fe K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectra, e) FT k2-weighted EXAFS spectra, and f) wavelet transforms for the k2-weighted Fe K-edge EXAFS signals for FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR and the reference samples of bulk Fe, Fe2O3, and FePc. g) FT-EXAFS fitting for the FeN4–O–NCR catalyst in R space (inset: proposed schematic model for FeN4–O–NCR).
The detailed atomic structure and electronic states of FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR were probed by Fe K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). The oxidation state of Fe atoms in each sample was first analyzed using Fe K-edge X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) (Figure 2d). The Fe K-edge XANES spectra for FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR were located between those of the Fe foil and Fe2O3 reference samples and were close to that of iron phthalocyanine (FePc), suggesting the presence of cationic Fe states in the samples.[22] The valence state of Fe in FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR were estimated from their corresponding XANES derivative spectra, with the fitting results indicating the average Fe oxidation state in FeN4–O–NCR (+2.7) was higher than the average Fe oxidation state in FeN4/C (+2.4) (Figure S11, Supporting Information). A higher average Fe valence state in FeN4–O–NCR is consistent with an additional axial oxygen ligand bound to Fe. For FeN4-centered macrocycles, there are two characteristic Fe K-edge features (labeled as A and B) at photon energies ≈7132 eV and ≈7140 eV. The relative intensity of the two peaks (IA/IB) is sensitive to the distortion degree of the FeN4 square-planarity and also the coordination environment of N in the FeN4 structures. The difference seen in the IA/IB ratio between the Fe–N–C catalysts and FePc is mainly due to the different N type, i.e., pyridinic-type N in the Fe–N–C catalysts and pyrrolic-type N in FePc. As for the Fe–O–NCR and FeN4/CR catalysts, both of which were derived from Fe–Phen, the Fe–N4 sites in both these Fe–N–C materials contained pyridinic N, with their XANES spectra in the photon energy range 7130–7140 eV being very similar. The Fe–N4 structures of both Fe–O–NCR and FeN4/CR catalysts were not absolutely planar, with the distortion degree for Fe–O–NCR (IA/IB = 1.05) and FeN4/CR (IA/IB = 1.04) being very similar.[23] Results suggest that the presence of the axial oxygen atom bound to Fe in Fe–O–NCR did not really affect the FeN4 planarity (though as seen in Figure S11, Supporting Information, significantly increased the Fe valency). Fourier transformed (FT) k3-weighted χ(k)-function Fe K-edge extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analyses provided detailed information about the local coordination of Fe sites in FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR (Figure 2e). The Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra for FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR both showed a prominent peak at ≈1.5 Å, consistent with the first Fe–N shell in the FePc reference or the first Fe–O shell in Fe2O3. No features were seen at ≈2.2 Å  (typically for Fe–Fe in Fe foil) or ≈2.5 Å (typical for the first Fe–Fe shell in Fe2O3), indicating that Fe atoms in FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR were stabilized in the form of Fe–Nx or FeNx–O. Wavelet transformed (WT) EXAFS is a useful tool for identifying the k and R dependence of absorption signals simultaneously, thus is capable of distinguishing heavier and lighter backscattering atoms.[24] The k3-weighted WT EXAFS spectra for FeN4/CR showed a contour profile in k-space similar to that of FePc with the contour intensity maximum at 3.2 Å−1 (Figure 2f), implying FeN4/CR possessed a comparable Fe coordination to FePc (i.e., FeN4). The contour intensity maximum for FeN4–O–NCR also resembled FeN4/CR, but was shifted slightly toward that of Fe2O3 suggesting the existence of a Fe–O bond in the FeN4–O–NCR sample.[25] Quantitative structural configuration information for these samples were extracted by least-squares EXAFS curve-fitting analyses (Figures 2g; Figures S12–S16 and Table S3, Supporting Information). The first coordination shell of FeN4/CR could be fitted by a Fe–N scattering path with a Fe coordination number of 4.02, implying that the central Fe sites possessed a well-defined FeN4 configuration. In contrast, the data for FeN4–O–NCR was best-fitted by a mixture of Fe–N and Fe–O coordination paths, with Fe coordination numbers of 3.87 (N) and 0.89 (O), respectively. This implies that the central Fe sites in the FeN4–O–NCR possessed a FeN4O configuration, i.e., near square planar FeN4 moieties with one axial oxygen atom. The average Fe-N distances in R-space were 1.97 and 1.99 Å for FeN4–O–NCR and FeN4/CR, respectively, again suggesting that the axial O bound to Fe in in FeN4–O–NCR did not change the FeN4 planarity very much. As the same synthesis method was used to introduce FeN4 moieties on the surface of CR and O–NCR, the additional Fe–O coordination of Fe sites in FeN4–O–NCR must have originated from oxygen atoms originally present on the surface of the O–NCR support (i.e., the axial oxygen atom in FeN4–O–NCR must have been due to subsurface oxygen bridging graphene layers in the O–NCR support rather than post-synthetic adsorption of axial O-containing groups such as water or hydroxyl). To better understand this, DFT calculations were conducted to establish the preferred adsorption site of Fe–Phen on the surface of O–NCR during the pyrolysis treatment. The absolute values of the adsorption energy of Fe–Phen on O sites of O–NCR were all much larger than for adsorption of Fe–Phen on the C or N sites (Figure S17, Supporting Information), confirming that Fe–Phen would preferentially adsorb on the O sites of O–NCR creating axial (subsurface) Fe–O bonds. This would lead to the creation of FeN4–O active sites during the subsequent microwave-assisted pyrolysis step used to transform Fe–Phen/O–NCR to FeN4–O–NCR.
Ring disk electrode (RDE) tests were first performed to assess the catalytic performance of the as-synthesized catalysts using a typical three-electrode system in 0.1 m KOH. All the potentials obtained by the RDE tests were calibrated with respect to the RHE and corrected with 90% iR-compensation unless otherwise specified. From the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves, FeN4–O–NCR exhibited an obvious O2 reduction peak in the O2-saturated electrolyte and the highest cathodic peak current density among the control catalysts (including FeN4/CR) (Figure S18, Supporting Information). This suggested FeN4–O–NCR possessed both a high intrinsic ORR activity and excellent mass transport properties. FeN4–O–NCR delivered an extremely impressive ORR onset potential (Eonset) of 1.050 V and a half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.942 V in linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements (Figure 3a), outperforming FeN4/CR (0.999 and 0.890 V, respectively), O–NCR (0.935 and 0.837 V, respectively), CR (0.924 and 0.803 V, respectively), Pt/C (0.995 and 0.867 V, respectively), and almost all M–Nx/C SACs reported to date (Table S4, Supporting Information). Moreover, FeN4–O–NCR exhibited a remarkable kinetic current density of 39.56 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V (Jk, Figure 3b), which was 10.4 times higher than FeN4/CR (3.80 mA cm−2) and 19.8 times higher than Pt/C (2.00 mA cm−2). The outstanding ORR activity of FeN4–O–NCR was exemplified by its low Tafel slope of 54.3 mV dec−1 (Figure 3c), lower than the Tafel slopes for Pt/C (71.1 mV dec−1) and FeN4/CR (62.5 mV dec−1). Further, the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of FeN4–O–NCR (31.6 mF cm−2) was approximately twice that of FeN4/CR (15.1 mF cm−2), which is explained by the highly porous structure of FeN4–O–NCR that was beneficial for good mass transport during ORR. (Figure S19, Supporting Information).[16] The RDE tests thus verified that FeN4–O–NCR is an outstanding ORR catalyst under alkaline conditions.
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) LSV curves, b) comparison of E1/2 and jk at 0.9 V versus RHE, c) Tafel slope, and d) H2O2 yield and electron transfer number (n) for FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, O–NCR, CR, and Pt/C in 0.1 m KOH. e) Normalized i–t curves of FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, and Pt/C at 0.7 V (vs RHE) under a rotating rate of 1600 rpm. f) Normalized i–t curves of FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, and Pt/C at 0.7 V (vs RHE) and 1600 rpm with 25% (volume percentage) methanol addition around 300 s.
The selectivity of the electrocatalysts during ORR was next investigated. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) yields during ORR were investigated by rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) tests, thus allowing examination of the ORR pathway. FeN4–O–NCR showed a H2O2 yield below 4% over a wide range of potentials, whereas FeN4/CR produced a much higher H2O2 yield at all potentials studied (Figure 3d). The average electron transfer number for FeN4–O–NCR was calculated to be ≈3.96 in the potential range from 0.2 to 0.8 V, indicating an unusually high selectively for oxygen reduction to OH− through a 4 e− pathway. This result is consistent with the calculation results from the Koutecký–Levich (KL) plots (Figure S20, Supporting Information), where the average electron transfer number for FeN4–O–NCR was close to 4.0 at all potentials studied. In comparison, the control samples FeN4/CR, O–NCR and CR showed inferior selectivity toward the 4-electron ORR pathway. The ORR stability of FeN4–O–NCR was next investigated by chronoamperometry tests at a potential of 0.5 V (vs RHE) and CV cycling at potentials between 0.6–1.0 V (vs RHE) with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. FeN4–O–NCR exhibited a current retention of 96% after 20 000 s chronoamperometry (Figure 3e), with only a 5 mV degradation in E1/2 after 5000 CV cycles (Figure S21, Supporting Information), indicating that the catalyst possessed excellent stability. As shown in Figure S22 (Supporting Information), the Fe K-edge XANES spectra of FeN4–O–NCR before and after the ORR stability test were identical. Further, the FT-EXAFS fitting results revealed that FeN4–O–NCR after the ORR stability test (FeN4–O–NCR–ADT) retained its original structure:, i.e., approximately square planar FeN4 sites with one axial oxygen atom bound to Fe (Table S3, Supporting Information). Furthermore, FeN4–O–NCR showed outstanding methanol resistance with negligible current decay observed after injecting methanol into the electrolyte (Figure 3f).
Motivated by its superior ORR activity, FeN4–O–NCR was applied as the air-electrode catalyst in an aqueous primary zinc–air battery (ZAB) to assess its practical utility in energy devices (Figure 4a). The open–circuit voltage of the Zn–air battery assembled using the FeN4–O–NCR catalyst was 1.51 V (Figure S23, Supporting Information), higher than that of ZABs constructed using the FeN4/CR (1.47 V) or Pt/C (1.42 V) catalysts. The ZAB constructed using FeN4–O–NCR exhibited a truly impressive peak power density of 214.2 mW cm−2 at 334.1 mA cm−2 (Figure 4b), appreciably higher than the peak power densities of ZABs based on FeN4/CR (174.6 mW cm−2 at 289.5 mA cm−2), Pt/C (104.2 mW cm−2 at 228.5 mA cm−2), and other recently reported SAC-based electrocatalysts (Table S5, Supporting Information). From the discharge curves at various current densities (Figure 4c), the ZAB containing FeN4–O–NCR delivered higher voltages at all current densities compared to ZABs based on FeN4/CR, O–NCR, and Pt/C. The performance difference between FeN4–O–NCR and the other catalysts was more pronounced at higher current densities (i.e., practically useful current densities), further highlighting the superiority of FeN4–O–NCR as an ORR electrocatalyst. The ZAB based on FeN4–O–NCR delivered a specific energy density of 1016 Wh kgZn−1 at 20 mA cm−2 (Figure 4d), exceeding ZABs using FeN4/CR (944 Wh kgZn−1) or Pt/C (863 Wh kgZn−1) catalysts and approaching the maximum theoretical energy density of a ZAB (1086 Wh kgZn−1).
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Schematic illustration of a primary aqueous Zn–air battery. b) Discharge polarization and power density curves of ZABs constructed using FeN4–O–NCR, FeN4/CR, or Pt/C as the air electrode, respectively. c) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the aqueous ZABs at various current densities. d) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the aqueous ZABs at a current density of 20 mA cm−2. The specific energy was calculated based on the mass of consumed Zn.
The key role of axial (subsurface) Fe–O in enhancing the ORR activity of the FeN4–O–NCR catalyst was further examined by DFT calculations. Possible structures for FeN4–O–NCR were first modeled by DFT calculations, with the various proposed structures listed in Figure S22 (Supporting Information). The observed Fe–O bond length of ≈2.10 Å by EXAFS experiments ruled out all structures with adsorbed hydroxyl (FeN4–OH/NC, Fe–O ≈1.80 Å) or adsorbed oxygen atoms (FeN4–O/NC, Fe–O ≈1.65 Å) at Fe sites, since these structures possessed very small Fe–O bond distances (Figure S25, Supporting Information). Therefore, the only realistic structure was the N-doped graphene bilayer (O-bridged) FeN4–O–NC structures (Figure S22c,d, Supporting Information), in which the Fe–O bond lengths of FeN4–O–NpdC (≈2.08 Å) and FeN4–O–NprC (≈1.97 Å) were similar to experimental observations (subscripts pd and pr refer to pyridinic N and pyrrolic N, respectively). The O-bridged FeN4–O–NC structure was more thermodynamically stable than the FeN4/NC structure (Figure S26, Supporting Information), indicating the formation of FeN4–O–NC structure was completely feasible. To validate the intrinsic activity of the proposed FeN4–O–NC structures, we calculated Gibbs free energy profiles for the ORR elementary steps on the FeN4/C, FeN4/NC, and FeN4–O–NC models at 1.23 V. The optimized structure of the ORR intermediates (*O2, *OOH, *O, *OH) on FeN4–O–NC are depicted in Figure 5a. As shown in Figure 5b, the potential limiting step (PLS) for most of models was the final *OH desorption step, with the exception being the FeN4–O/C model. The optimal free energy changes of the potential limiting step (∆GPLS were 0.34 eV on FeN4–O–NpdC and 0.44 eV on FeN4–O–NprC) were lower than the corresponding values for the FeN4/C and three FeN4/NC structures. Although the ∆GPLS over the FeN4–O/C and FeN4–O/NgrC structure were close to that of FeN4–O–NC, the FeN4–O/C and FeN4–O/NgrC structures will not exist in alkaline environments since the O ligands will be protonated and converted into OH ligands (subscripts gr refer to graphitic N).[12, 26] The resulting FeN4–OH/C and FeN4–OH/NgrC structures delivered the highest ∆GPLS values of 0.84 and 1.00 eV, respectively, indicating poor ORR performance. The DFT results conclusively demonstrate that FeN4–O–NC offered the highest intrinsic activity for ORR, in excellent agreement with the experimental findings.
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Proposed ORR mechanism on the FeN4–O–NC catalyst. b) Free energy diagram for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) on various FeN4–based models. c) Scaling relationships between the adsorption free energies of *OH (ΔG*OH) and *O (ΔG*O) (cyan line) or *OOH (ΔG*OOH) (orange line). d) Volcano plot between ΔG*OH and the ORR overpotential (ηORR), e) Scaling relationships between the ηORR and d-band center of Fe-3d orbits for the FeN4–based structures. Subscripts pd, pr, and gr refer to pyridinic N, pyrrolic N, and graphitic N.
Further DFT calculations were performed to investigate the origin of the enhanced ORR activity of the FeN4–O–NC catalyst. Adsorption free energies for *OOH, *O, and *OH (ΔG*OOH, ΔG*O, and ΔG*OH) on the different FeN4–O–NC structural models are summarized in Table S6 (Supporting Information). Excellent linear correlations were found between ΔG*OOH and ΔG*OH, and also ΔG*O and ΔG*OH (Figure 5c).[27] The linearity of these plots suggested that ΔG*OH is an effective descriptor of the ORR overpotential, leading to the volcano plot in Figure 5d. The Fe centers in Fe–N4/C and Fe–N4/NC bind *OH too strongly (left side of the maximum in the volcano plot), while *OH binding is weakened in the presence of a simple axial O ligand (right side of the maximum in the volcano plot). The optimum ΔG*OH is found for the Fe centers in FeN4–O–NC with O atoms bridging between N-doped graphene sheets (i.e., subsurface O), thus delivering a very high ORR activity. In order to gain deep insights into the role of the bridging O atoms in tailoring the Fe energy levels and boosting the OOR catalytic activity, we further investigated the charge density and projected density of states (PDOS) of the different catalysts. Interestingly, the interaction between FeN4 and subsurface O bridging between N-doped graphene sheets gave Fe cations in FeN4–O–NC a unique electronic structure as the active site for ORR. Coordination to a bridging O atom (Figures S27–S29, Supporting Information) shifted the d-band center of the Fe-3d orbitals to more negative energy relative to traditional FeN4 sites (Figure 5e; Figure S30, Supporting Information). As a result, the antibonding states of FeN4–O–NC and adsorbed species were less occupied, thus weakening the adsorption of ORR intermediates (moving toward to apex in the volcano plot in Figure 5d) and enhancing overall ORR kinetics.
3 Conclusion
A novel FeN4–O–NCR catalyst was synthesized, which contained Fe single-atom sites immobilized on porous N-doped carbon-rods, wherein the Fe atoms were coordinated by four in-plane N atoms and one axial oxygen atom (subsurface O bridging between N-doped graphene sheets). The addition of the axial bridging oxygen atom increased the average Fe valence and lowered the d-band center position compared to conventional square-planar FeN4 sites present in most Fe–N–C SACs, favorably tuning the adsorption energies of ORR intermediates for optimal ORR activity. Owing to the high intrinsic ORR activity of the FeN4–O sites, the FeN4–O–NCR catalyst delivered state-of-the-art activity as an ORR catalyst in alkaline media. When applied as the cathode catalyst in an aqueous zinc–air battery, an extraordinary peak power density of 214.2 mW cm−2 at 334.1 mA cm−2 was achieved, with the specific energy density of 1016 Wh kgZn−1 at 20 mA cm−2 approaching the theoretical maximum. DFT calculations verified the role of bridging O atoms as an effective electronic modulator of Fe centers. Results guide the development of microenvironment optimized metal single-atom catalysts for ORR and other applications.
Acknowledgements
L.P. and J.Y. contributed equally to this work. GINW was supported by a James Cook Research Fellowship, administered by the Royal Society Te Apārangi. This work received additional financial support from the MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, the Energy Education Trust of New Zealand, a generous philanthropic donation from Greg and Kathryn Trounson, the National Key Projects for Fundamental Research and Development of China (2018YFB1502002), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51825205, 51772305, 21871279, and 21902168), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2191002), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB17000000), the Royal Society-Newton Advanced Fellowship (NA170422), the International Partnership Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (GJHZ201974), the K. C. Wong Education Foundation, and the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of the CAS.
Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Auckland, as part of the Wiley - The University of Auckland agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Open Research
Supporting Information
References