•
Porous rod-like, mixed rod and sheet-like, and sheet-like of cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanostructures were prepared.
•
The morphologies and crystal structures of Co3O4 were controlled by adjusting the urea concentration.
•
The Co3O4 nanosheets showed the highest catalytic activity for oxygen evolution reaction.
Porous rod-like, mixed rod and sheet-like, and sheet-like of cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanostructures were prepared.
The morphologies and crystal structures of Co3O4 were controlled by adjusting the urea concentration.
The Co3O4 nanosheets showed the highest catalytic activity for oxygen evolution reaction.
Rod-like, mixed rod-like and sheet-like, and sheet-like cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanostructures were synthesized by a two-step process of microwave-hydrothermal and calcination using cobalt hydroxide carbonate as precursor, whose morphology could be controlled by adjusting the urea concentration in microwave-hydrothermal. With the increasing urea concentration, the cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursors transformed from rods to sheets, and their crystal structures changed from orthorhombic to monoclinic. After the calcination process, the cobalt hydroxide carbonate converted to Co3O4 without obvious change of their morphology. Meanwhile, a large number of mesopores appeared in the Co3O4 nanostructures. Of the three morphologies, analysis of catalytic activity for oxygen evolution reaction (OER) demonstrated that the Co3O4 nanosheets exhibited highest current density and lowest overpotential. The superior electrochemical performance of Co3O4 nanosheets might be attributed to their high surface areas and porous structure, which could efficiently accelerate electron transport and improve the catalytic activity for OER in alkaline solution.
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) plays an important role in the devices of energy conversion and storage, such as fuel cells and metal-air batteries. RuO2 and IrO2 are considered as the best OER catalysts in acid and base environment
[1]
,
[2]
. However, the large-scale applications of RuO2 and IrO2 are limited by their scarcity and expensiveness. For this reason, non-noble metal oxide catalysts with good electrocatalytic activity have been proposed for OER in alkaline media. Up to date, oxides of manganese (Mn), nickel (Ni) and cobalt (Co) have been used as OER catalysts and the catalytic effects were extensively investigated
[3]
,
[4]
,
[5]
. Among these non-noble metal oxides, the spinel cobalt oxide (Co3O4) shows a great potential as OER catalyst due to its excellent activity and stability in alkaline media.
It is well known that the performances of the metal oxides are strongly depended on their morphology and structures (crystalline sizes, stacking manners, orientations, and so on), which are related to the preparation methods
[6]
,
[7]
. Thus, it has attracted much attention to fabricate Co3O4 with various morphology and structures, for expecting the higher activity in electrochemical applications. Recently, Co3O4 nanocubes
[8]
, nanorods
[9]
, nanobelts
[10]
and nanospheres
[11]
have been synthesized by sol-gel
[12]
, chemical vapor deposition
[13]
, template method
[14]
and hydro/solvothermal
[15]
. However, these reported preparation methods for Co3O4 nanostructures have some shortcomings, such as toxicity of solvents, expensive catalysts and time-consuming process. Therefore, it is essential to develop an efficient, environmentally friendly and simple method to synthesize Co3O4 nanostructures. Microwave-hydrothermal method has stimulated extensive interest in fabricating nanostructures because of its rapid volumetric heating, convenience and cost-effectiveness. Up to now, many efforts has been devoted to preparing Co3O4 nanostructures by microwave-hydrothermal method, such as, Co3O4 nanosheets with porous structures were fabricated by a facile microwave-assisted route, showing an enhanced reversible capacity and cycling performance
[16]
. Porous Co3O4 nanowire arrays exhibited excellent capacity retention and rate capability at higher current rate
[17]
which was synthesized by microwave-hydrothermal. Yan et al.
[18]
prepared the Co3O4-graphene sheet-on-sheet composite by microwave-assisted method which showed an excellent high rate capability and highly eversible large capacity at common rate.
Previous investigations indicated that the morphology of Co3O4 could be influenced by the urea concentration. For example, Cao et al.
[19]
reported the synthesis of 3D flower-like Co3O4 by precisely controlling the urea concentration, and the Co3O4 flowers possessed outstanding CO oxidation activity. Ibupoto et al.
[20]
prepared Co3O4 nanoflowers and nanowires by tailoring the concentration of urea, and the nanoflowers presented selectively sensitive to glucose. Therefore, it is an effective way to employ adjusting the concentration of urea instead of costing long reaction time for synthesizing Co3O4 nanostructures, which could avoid the micro-/nanostructures and open spaces between neighboring particles being destroyed or blocked
[9]
. Hence, controlling of urea concentration in rapid and easily microwave-hydrothermal should be a facile and low-cost way for fabricating Co3O4 with desirable micro-/nanostructures. Moreover, the process also enables to control structure-dependent properties, which might be significant for further applications of Co3O4 for OER.
In the present work, Three different morphologies of Co3O4: nanorods, nanosheets and a mixture of nanorods and nanosheets were controllably synthesized by a simple two-step process of microwave-hydrothermal and calcination. It is found that the different morphologies were obtained by simply adjusting the concentration of urea. Physical characterizations were carried out to compare surface area, pore size distribution. Moreover, the electrochemical performances for OER were also investigated.
All chemicals or materials were used directly without any further purification.
First, in order to study the effect of urea on the morphology of as-synthesized Co3O4 nanostructures, different amounts of urea were prepared in a 60 mL of beaker, that was 83 mM, 322 mM and 664 mM (designated as C1, C2 and C3), respectively. While the cobalt chloride (CoCl2·6H2O) was kept at 1.2 g. Then, the prepared solution was transferred into the vessel, which was surrounded by a safety shield and heated by a microwave synthesizer (MARS-10) at 180 °C for 1 h. After cooling down to room temperature naturally, the precipitates were centrifuged. They were washed repeatedly with distilled water and absolute ethanol for several times, and then were dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 8 h.
Subsequently, the as-synthesized products were put into a porcelain crucible, followed by placing them in a horizontal tube electric furnace. Then the products were heated to 400 °C (5 °C min−1) and maintained for 2 h in air atmosphere. When the furnace was cooled to ambient temperature naturally, the porous Co3O4 nanorods/nanosheets were obtained.
The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns of the assemblies were detected by a Rigaku (Tokyo, Japan) D/max-2400 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The thermal behavior of the products was studied using a METTLER TOLEDO STAR TGA/SDTA851 thermal analyzer at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 in air. Scanning electronic microscope (SEM) images of the products were obtained using a JEOL JSM-6700 field emission scanning electron microscope. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the products were obtained by a JEOL JEM-3010 high-resolution TEM. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) spectra of the assemblies were measured by a Germany EQUINOX 55 spectrometer (KBr pellets) in the 4000-400 cm−1 range. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on a Kratos AXILS ULTRA instrument equipped with a monochromated Al K X-ray source. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) specific surface area (SBET) was determined by nitrogen adsorption in a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 nitrogen adsorption apparatus (USA) via a multipoint BET method using the adsorption data in the relative pressure (P/P0) range of 0.05–0.3. The desorption isotherm was used to determine the pore-size distribution using the Barret-Joyner-Halender (BJH) method, assuming a cylindrical pore modal. The nitrogen adsorption volume at the relative pressure (P/P0) range of 0.997 was used to determine the pore volume.
The electrochemical measurements were performed with a Corrtest electrochemical work station (CS310 Wuhan Corrtest Instrument Co. Ltd.) in a conventional three-electrode cell using the coated GC (3 mm diameter, disk: 0.071 cm2) as the working electrode, platinum foil as the auxiliary electrode, and Ag/AgCl as reference electrode. 0.1 M KOH solutions were used as electrolyte in the experiments.
To prepare a catalyst ink for oxygen evolution reaction (OER), 5.0 mg of catalyst powder, 100 μL of DI water, 12.5 μL diluted Nafion solution (5 wt% in ethanol, Alfa Aesar), 1.07 ml of ethanol were mixed and sonicated for 0.5 h to form a homogeneous black suspension. 3 μL of this suspension was cast on the pretreated GCE surface, and then dried in air to prevent sample detachment from the working electrode during electrochemical testing. The catalyst loading was controlled by 0.2 mg cm−2. Before the electrochemical measurements, the surface of catalyst was cleaned by cycling the potential between 0.35 V and 0.95 V for 50 times with scan rate of 100 mV s−1 in an N2-protected 0.1 M KOH. The OER test was performed in 0.1 M KOH with linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) from −0.35 V and 0.95 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 with the electrode rotated at 1600 rpm. The durability test for OER was performed on the catalysts by cycling the electrode potential between 0.35 V and 0.95 V at 50 mV s−1 for 1000 cycles. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, 0.1 Hz-100 kHz, 10 mV) is measured on a Corrtest electrochemical work station (CS310 Wuhan Corrtest Instrument Co. Ltd.) at room temperature.
Fig. 1
a shows the XRD patterns of the precursors obtained at different urea concentrations. It can be seen that the diffraction peaks of precursor C1 are well indexed to the orthorhombic cobalt hydroxide carbonate (Co(CO3)0.5(OH)·0.11H2O, JCPDS card No. 48-0083). As the concentration of urea increases, new diffraction peaks appear in the precursor C2, which can be indexed to the monoclinic cobalt hydroxide carbonate phase (Co2(OH)2CO3, JCPDS card No 29-1416). The formation of Co2(OH)2CO3 means the transformation of crystal structures (from orthorhombic to a mixture of orthorhombic and monoclinic). The precursor C3 shows a complete transformation to monoclinic phase. After annealing in air at 400 °C for 2 h, all these precursors convert to cubic Co3O4 (JCPDS card No 42-1467), which is shown in
Fig. 1
b. No peak of other phases is observed in this pattern, indicting a high purity of the as-obtained products. The XPS measurements are performed and shown in
Fig. S1
. The sharp peaks at 284.4, 530.0, and 780.0 eV are correspond to the characteristic peaks of C 1s, O 1s, and Co 2p, respectively, indicating the existence of carbon, oxygen and cobalt elements on the surfaces of all of the Co3O4 nanostructures.
Fig. 1. (a) XRD patterns of the as-prepared cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursors synthesized by different concentrations of urea; (b) XRD patterns of the Co3O4 synthesized by calcining the corresponding precursors at 400 °C for 2 h.
The thermal behaviors of as-prepared precursors were studied by thermal analysis. TG/DTA curves record at a constant heating rate of 10° min−1 during the temperature increased from 50 °C to 700 °C. From
Fig. 2
a, it can be observed that there are two stages of weight losses for the precursor C1. The first loss (220–330 °C, 8.9 wt%) can be ascribed to the removal of structure water and carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide might generate in the dehydroxylation and decomposition of carbonate group and hydroxides
[21]
. The subsequent weight loss (330–400 °C, 11.7 wt%) is assigned to the further decomposition of residual carbonate group; and the total weight loss is about 20.6%. The DTA curve of precursor C2 (
Fig. 2
b) shows very similar weight loss patterns to C1, whereas, the precursor C3 (
Fig. 2
c) shows lower decompose temperature at the first loss (<270 °C), it is probably due to the removal of interlayer water and hydroxyl
[22]
. Meanwhile, the second loss between 270 °C and 380 °C is assigned to decomposition of carbonate and residual hydroxy groups. The weight loss corresponding to the two steps in TGA is about 12.9% and 13.7%, respectively. Small differences of TG/DTA results between these precursors confirm the discrepancies of precursor compositions (
Fig. 3
) under different urea concentration. For all the precursors, no further weight loss was detected from 400 °C to 700 °C.
Fig. 2. TG/DTA curves of the as-prepared cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursors synthesized by different concentrations of urea: (a) C1, (b) C2 and (c) C3.
Fig. 3. FTIR spectra of the as-prepared cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursors synthesized by different concentrations of urea: (a) C1, (b) C2 and (c) C3.
Fig. 3
presents the FTIR spectra of the as-prepared precursors. The strong peak at 3501 cm−1 is assigned to the stretching vibration of OH group of molecular water. The shoulder vibration appearing at 3383 cm−1 is ascribed to the interaction between OH groups and carbonate anions. The peaks at 1560 cm−1 and 1350 cm−1 are attributed to the stretching vibration of ν(OCO). The bands at 977 cm−1 and 837 cm−1 are corresponding to δ(Co-OH) and δ(CO3) bending mode
[23]
,
[24]
. Compared with C1 and C2, the spectrum of C3 shows obvious peaks at 3383 cm−1 and 977 cm−1, owing to the partial substitution of carbonate anions by OH groups. Moreover, the splitting of bands observed at 1560–1350 cm−1 suggests the decreased symmetry of carbonate group
[17]
.
The morphology of as-prepared precursors and corresponding Co3O4 nanostructures were investigated by SEM.
Fig. 4
a–f exhibit the SEM images of precursors obtained under varied urea concentrations. The as-prepared precursor C1 possesses flower cluster microstructures, which are assembled by numerous rod-like structures with diameters of ∼20 nm, whose lengths are ranged from several to tens μm (
Fig. 4
a). The precursor C2 shows a mixture of nanorods and nanosheets when the urea concentration increases (
Fig. 4
b). Only the sheet-like structures with the width of ∼2 μm and thickness of ∼20 nm are obtained for the precursor C3 (shown in
Fig. 4
c). The SEM images of the calcined products from corresponding cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursor are shown in
Fig. 4
d–f. It is clear that the precursor morphology is retained after the calcination. Interestingly, the rod-like structures are disassembled, forming some self-organized nanorods with many loosely aggregated Co3O4 particles (as shown in
Fig. 4
d). Such aggregation leads to considerable decrease in active surface area for gas adsorption and difficult diffusion of gas molecule. From the
Fig. 4
f, the Co3O4 nanosheets are closely arrayed with uniform pores, which have a positive role on the gas adsorption and diffusion
[25]
.
Fig. 4. The SEM images of the as-prepared cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursors synthesized by different concentrations of urea: (a) C1, (b) C2 and (c) C3; SEM image of the Co3O4 structures prepared by the corresponding precursors at 400 °C for 2 h: (d) C1, (e) C2 and (f) C3.
Fig. 5
a shows the typical TEM image of Co3O4 nanorods with diameter of ∼200 nm and length of several micrometers. The nanorods are porous and constructed from numerous interconnected Co3O4 nanoparticles with an average size of 30–70 nm (inset of
Fig. 5
a). The high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image is shown in
Fig. 5
b. The lattice fringe spacing was measured to be 0.24 nm, which is in good agreement with the (311) plane of cubic Co3O4. Meanwhile, the selected area diffraction pattern (SAED) is shown in
Fig. 5
b, which further confirms that the Co3O4 nanorods are polycrystalline structure. With the increasing urea concentration, nanosheet structure will be generated.
Fig. 5
c shows a typical TEM image of Co3O4 nanosheets. It clearly demonstrates uniform nanosheets with a density of nanopores in the nanosheets. The mesoporous nanosheets have well distributed nanoparticles with average size of 50–100 nm (inset of
Fig. 5
c). HRTEM image of Co3O4 nansheets is also shown in
Fig. 5
d. It reveals that the interparticle pore is larger than that in nanorods. In the present work, this porous structure is stable and condensed, attributing to the rapidity and uniform heating process. The result is different from the previous report of Roy et al.
[9]
, in which the pores became discontinued or blocked after long-time hydrothermal treatment. The corresponding SAED is shown in the inset of
Fig. 5
d. Further, the rings can be indexed to the (111), (220), (311) (400) and (511) planes of Co3O4.
Fig. 5. TEM images of the Co3O4 microstructure obtained by corresponding precursors: ((a)–(b)) C1 and ((c)–(d)) C3; (b) and (d) TEM images under High resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the corresponding samples, respectively. The inset is electron diffraction patterns.
Fig. 6
shows Raman spectra of Co3O4 nanostructures obtained at different urea concentrations. All the Raman spectra of Co3O4 nanostructure show four obvious peaks located at about 194, 468, 505, 670 cm−1 corresponding to F2g, Eg, F2g, A1g symmetry
[26]
, respectively. Compared with some previous reports, there are slightly shifts of peaks in the present work
[27]
, which might be attributed to the different morphology and sizes of Co3O4.
Fig. 6. Raman spectra of Co3O4 prepared by corresponding precursors: (a) C1, (b) C2 and (c) C3.
N2 adsorption-desorption isotherms of the Co3O4 prepared at varies urea concentrations are shown in
Fig. 7
. It can be seen that all the isotherms display type IV isotherm plot with a type H3 hysteresis loop according to IUPAC classification
[28]
, indicating the presence of mesopores produced by inter-aggregated secondary particles in higher relative pressure range (0.8 < P/P0 < 1). It is worth noting that the isotherms corresponding to the Co3O4 nanosheets show higher absorption than that of nanorods at high relative pressure (P/P0) range (approaching 1), indicating the formation of macropores and/or the increase of pore volume
[29]
. Moreover, the pore-size distribution is further confirmed by its corresponding Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) pore-size distribution plot inset of
Fig. 7
. It can be seen that both the nanosheets and nanorods reveal the bimodal distribution. Both the Co3O4 nanorods and nanosheets contain smaller mesopores distribution less than 5 nm, and larger mesopores with a peak pore diameter of ca. 39 nm for Co3O4 nanorods, peak pore diameter of ca. 103 nm for Co3O4 nansheets and ca. 47 nm for the mixture of nanorods and nanosheets, respectively. The formation of pores mainly results from the slow decomposition of the precursors. Hence, it indicates that interparticle space of Co2(OH)2CO3 is larger than that of Co(CO3)0.5(OH)·0.11H2O.
Table 1
summarizes the textural properties of Co3O4 structures. As the concentration of urea increases, the BET surface area, pore size and pore volume increase. The increased pore volume can be explained that smaller sized and aggregated Co3O4 nanorods particles hinder the large pores (mesopores), and thus lower the pore volume. So, the aggregated particles and interparticle pores structure influence on the pore volume of as-obtained Co3O4.
Fig. 7. N2 adsorption-desorption isotherms with the corresponding BJH pore-size distribution plot (the inset) for the synthesized Co3O4 by corresponding precursors: (a) C1, (b) C2 and (c) C3.
Table 1. Summary of textural parameter and OER catalytic activity of Co3O4 with various structures.
The BET surface area was determined by a multipoint BET method using the adsorption data in relative pressure (P/P0) range of 0.05–0.3.
Pore volume was determined by nitrogen adsorption volume at P/P0 = 0.997.
Overpotential: according to the equation Overpotential = E−E°, where E is read off directly from LSV curves, E° is pH-dependent standard potential for water oxidation, E° (V) vs. Ag/AgCl (0.1 mol L−1 KCl) = 1.033–0.0591 × pH = 1.033–0.0591 × 13 = 264.7 mV.
It is well-known that the product morphology can be influenced by the precursor nanostructures, reaction temperature and reactant concentrations. In this work, we only study the effect of urea on the morphology of final products. The schematic illustrates the stepwise evolution process of the cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursors (
Fig. 8
). As is mentioned earlier, urea can be used as a good precipitator since the urea hydrolysis could provide both CO2 and NH3 and the possible reactions can be involved as the following equations
[22]
.
(1)
C2H4N4 + 4H2O → 4NH3 + 2CO2
(2)
NH3 + H2O → NH4+ + OH−
(3)
CO2 + H2O → CO32− + 2H+
(4)
Co2+ + 0.5CO32− + OH− + 0.11H2O → Co(CO3)0.5(OH)·0.11H2O
(5)
Co(CO3)0.5(OH)·0.11H2O + O2 → 2Co3O4 + 3CO2↑ + 3.66H2O↑
Fig. 8. Schematic illustration of the evolution of morphology for cobalt hydroxide carbonates precursors obtained under different concentrations of urea.
Under microwave-hydrothermal conditions, cobalt ions interact with the CO32− and OH− anions due to the electrostatic effect, forming the nuclei of cobalt hydroxide carbonate. It is speculated that there might be a competition with CO32− and OH− during their inhibition and adsorption on cobalt ions in solution. At the low urea concentration, nucleation rate is low. CO32− ions are preferably adsorbed on the high surface energy plane of the orthorhombic cobalt hydroxide carbonate, leading to cobalt hydroxide carbonate crystals growing along the fastest orientation [010], and forming rod-like structure. Previous research has studied the rod-like structures with abundant of nanorods (C1) oriented growing along [010] direction
[30]
. Then, when the urea concentration increases (C2), OH− in the solution increases. The CO32− in the compound is partially replaced by OH− ions (as seen in
Fig. 4
), which prevents radial growth on Co2+ exposing facets. Thus, the tendency towards oriented growth of the compound dominated by carbonate anions is weakened
[17]
, and sheet-like structure is generated. Meanwhile, the crystal structure transform orthorhombic into monoclinic cobalt hydroxide carbonate. Hence, increasing of OH− concentration is favorable to synthesize Co3O4 crystal transformed from orthorhombic to monoclinic phase. This result agrees well with previous work about formation of NaTaO3 monoclinic phase
[31]
. Finally, cobalt hydroxide carbonates sheet-like aggregate together with 3D framework flower (C3) due to the reduction of surface energy. Until now, the shape-controlled assembly mechanism is still not very clear. In this work, the applied method can provide important information for structure design and morphology control on Co3O4.
To assess their OER catalytic activity, the catalysts of Co3O4 were measured in a standard three-electrode system in the 0.1 M KOH solution, and the working electrode was continuously rotating at 1600 rpm. The current densities (j mA cm−2, normalized by geometric area of the glassy carbon electrode) of catalysts were shown in
Fig. 9
a. For comparison, no obvious current response was observed for the bare electrode. The polarization curves of different Co3O4 structures show that they start at different potentials, which can be attributed to the effect of shape and the difference of electrolyte diffusion on porous Co3O4. The current-onset potential of Co3O4 nanosheets starts at 480 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl,
Table 1
) where the OER activity begins. Similarly, for nanorods and the mixed morphology, which start at 680 mV and 700 mV, respectively.
Fig. 9. OER polarization curves for the synthesized Co3O4 by corresponding precursors: (a) C1, (b) C2, (c) C3 and (d) blank electrode.
The overpotentials determined at 0.5 mA/cm2 from the LSV of
Fig. 9
are shown in
Table 1
, indicating that nanosheets affords a small overpotential of 399 mV (E°H2O/O2 = 265 mV at pH 13) (
Fig. 9
a), which much lower than those other cobalt oxides of various morphologies. According to the following equation
[32]
:
(6)
η = constant-blogS
where η and S are corresponding to the overpotential for OER and BET surface area, respectively, and b is the Tafel slope (within the Tafel region, b is constant). From this equation, it can be seen that the BET surface area is related to the overpotential. In our work, the lowest overpotential is obtained by Co3O4 nanosheets, which possess the highest BET surface area. Meanwhile, the current density of Co3O4 nanosheets reaches to 8.56 mA cm−2, which is higher than that of Co3O4 nanorods (4.42 mA cm−2). Above results demonstrate that the nanosheets show higher active for OER.
Further insight into the kinetics of catalytic reactions was examined with the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique (
Fig. 10
). According to the previous work
[33]
, the high frequency region of arc is attributed to the interfacial properties of the electrodes and corresponds to the charge-transfer resistance, and low frequency region of inclined line is corresponding to the diffusive resistance related to the diffusion of electrolyte within the pores of the electrode. From the
Fig. 10
, it can be clearly seen that Co3O4 nanosheets show smaller semicircle than the Co3O4 nanorods and the mixture. The value of charge-transfer resistance Rct calculated for Co3O4 nanosheets is 196 Ω, which is smaller than 202 Ω for Co3O4 nanorods and 272 Ω for the mixture, respectively, indicating much faster electron transfer between the mesoporous Co3O4 nanosheets and the electrode substrate. This result may be attributed to the larger pores in the nanosheets, which can provide a large number of channels to ensure the electrolyte transmission. So, such differences of charge transport efficiency should be closely associated with the performance for OER catalysis
[34]
.
Fig. 10. EIS of the synthesized Co3O4 by corresponding precursors: (a) C1, (b) C2 and (c) C3.
To investigate their catalytic stability for OER, the catalysts of Co3O4 were measured after cycling the potential from 0.35 V to 0.95 V 1000 times (
Fig. 11
). After cycling, the OER activity of Co3O4 nanosheets at 0.95 V changes from 8.56 mA cm−2 to 8.09 mA cm−2, resulting in little loss (5%) of activity. The OER activity of Co3O4 nanorods and the mixture of both decease from 4.42 mA cm−2 to 3.71 mA cm−2, and 2.91 mA cm−2 to 2.30 mA cm−2, corresponding to an activity loss of 16% and 21%, respectively. The better durability of nanosheets may due to the porous nanosheets be able to retain its origin structure after the durability test.
Fig. 11. OER polarization curve for the synthesized Co3O4 by corresponding precursors: (a) C1, (b) C2 and (c) C3 initially and after the stability tests.
According to the results presented above, the catalytic activity of Co3O4 nanostructure for OER is influenced by BET, pore volume and pore size. By comparing the different nanostructures of Co3O4, nanosheets display the highest catalytic activity for OER. It can be ascribed to its higher pore volume and pore size, which benefits for the diffusion of electrolyte and the release of O2 during OER tests. In addition, porous nanosheets array configuration with larger BET can ensure enough contact with electrolyte and Co3O4 catalyst.
A facile microwave-hydrothermal method combined with a subsequent calcination process was designed for the synthesis of Co3O4 nanorods, nanosheets and a mixture of nanorods and nanosheets. The morphology and microstructures of cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursor are strongly depended on the urea concentration during microwave-hydrothermal. With the increasing urea concentration, the precursor morphology varies from rod-like to sheet-like and the crystal structure transforms from orthorhombic to monoclinic. Moreover, after calcination (400 °C, 2 h) the formed Co3O4 retain the morphology of cobalt precursors. Of the three morphologies, the electrochemical measurements show that the as-synthesized Co3O4 nanosheets possess highest current density and lowest overpotential, exhibiting excellent electrocatalytic activity for OER in alkaline solution. The good electrochemical performance might be ascribed to the large BET and pore volume. The present work provides a simple and controllable method to synthesize Co3O4 nanosheets, which might have potential applications as OER catalysts in alkaline solution.
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundations of China (
51275417
and
51521061
), the “111” Project under Grant No.
B08040
.
The following is the supplementary data related to this article:
Download: Download Word document (285KB)
It can be manipulated by changing the parameters, such as, the concentration of the reducing/oxidizing agent or the concentration of the precursor during synthesis [31]. Various structures of Co3O4 nanoparticles have been reported, such as nanoflowers [35], nanowires [34], and nanostructures [36,37], for different catalytic applications. Among them, one-dimensional (1D) Co3O4 nanowires synthesized by the hydrothermal method exhibited the highest urea oxidation reaction (UOR) activity owing to the high surface-to-volume ratio, which results in fast kinetics of electrons [35].
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.