The increasing carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere is considered a major contributor to the greenhouse effect and global warming.1 The electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide could provide an attractive solution to this issue, allowing carbon dioxide to be converted into useful fuels and utilized as a chemical feedstock.2 It is also an energy storage strategy for future energy systems based on intermittent sources of renewable energy.3
The main hurdle for this technology is the availability of efficient catalysts that can promote multiple proton–electron transfer reactions involved in the reduction of carbon dioxide with fast kinetics and high selectivity. Much research effort has been devoted to the development of high-performance catalysts,2 primarily based on metals,4 metal oxides,5 and metal complexes.6 Recent studies demonstrated that the introduction of heteroatoms such as nitrogen7a–7f or boron7g into nanocarbon materials could give rise to an enhanced electrocatalytic activity for carbon dioxide reduction as compared to their pristine analogues. Carbon monoxide,7a,7c,7d formate,7b or acetate7e were found to be the main reaction products when using nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers (NCNFs), carbon nanotubes (NCNTs), or nanodiamonds (NDs).
However, the role of nitrogen species in carbon dioxide reduction remains unclear. For example, Kumar et al. proposed that positively charged carbon atoms are the active sites, based on comparative X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies and stability tests.7a Based on the activity displayed in other catalytic reduction reactions (e.g., the oxygen reduction reaction), Zhang et al. suggested pyrrolic and pyridinic nitrogen species as the active sites.7b Using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, Ajayan et al. suggested that pyridinic nitrogen7c or pyridinic and graphitic nitrogen7d atoms are the active sites for carbon dioxide reduction. On the other hand, Guo et al. proposed that graphitic/quaternary nitrogen atoms are the only active sites, according to their method of calculation.8
In light of these controversial results, it is important to clarify the role of doped nitrogen species for a better understanding of the structure–activity relationship of catalysts. In combination with DFT calculation, the present study focuses on an exploration for the reaction mechanism and the effect of each nitrogen species, based on the synthesis of nitrogen-doped CNT (NCNT) catalysts through the calcination of composites of poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) and oxidized CNTs, that is, PDDA@OCNT catalysts. Synthesis details and structural analyses in can be found in the Supporting Information, Figures S1–S3.
Firstly, the chemical states of nitrogen atoms in NCNT catalysts were analyzed. Four types of nitrogen species could be identified by N 1s spectroscopy (Supporting Information, Figure S4).7a–7d, 9a As shown in Figure 1 a, the fraction of each nitrogen species was similar for the NCNT catalysts calcined from 700 °C (NCNT-1-700, NCNT-2-700 and NCNT-3-700), while the overall amount of nitrogen rose from 0.5 to 1.1 and further to 1.8 at % (Figure 1 b) due to the increased amounts of PDDA in the PDDA@OCNT composites (Figure S1). When increasing the calcination temperature from 500 (NCNT-3-500) to 700 (NCNT-3-700) and further to 900 °C (NCNT-3-900), the fraction of pyrrolic nitrogen species decreased significantly and the fraction of quaternary nitrogen species increased markedly (Figure 1 a). Meanwhile, the overall nitrogen content decreased from 2.3 to 1.8 and further to 0.7 at % (Figure 1 b).
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
(a) Fractions of different types of nitrogen species expressed as Nx/Noverall and (b) the atomic content of each type of nitrogen species from XPS N 1s spectra. (c) Schematic illustration for the transformation pathways of nitrogen species. (d) TPD profiles of OCNT-3 and PDDA@OCNT-3 composite in helium at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1, HCN, m/z=27; H2, m/z=2.
Thermogravimetric (TG) analysis (Figure S1) revealed that there was little additional weight loss for pure PDDA and PDDA@OCNT composite at temperatures above 500 °C. A temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) experiment was carried out to study the transformation of nitrogen species at different calcination temperatures. The proposed transformation pathways of nitrogen species are shown in Figure 1 c. Because PDDA itself has a similar pyrrolic structure, it is not surprising that the highest fraction of pyrrolic nitrogen was observed in NCNT-3-500. As shown in Figure 1 d, the formation of a small amount of HCN in PDDA@OCNT-3 composite was observed from 500 until to 1000 °C, and almost no HCN signal for pure OCNT was detected in the same temperature range (not shown). A general trend was proposed in previous work:9b at low temperatures, the pyrrolic nitrogen partly decomposes or partly converts into pyridine groups, involving the formation of HCN. With increasing temperature, the pyridinic nitrogen either further transforms into the quaternary nitrogen or decomposes, giving rise to further formation of HCN. At high temperatures, the quaternary nitrogen is the main species. Pyrrolic nitrogen might also convert into quaternary nitrogen directly, with the release of HCN.9a,9c Compared to the H2 signal from OCNT-3 in the temperature range of 500 to 850 °C, more H2 was observed when the PDDA@OCNT-3 composite was heated. Thus, some release of H2 could occur during the transformation of nitrogen species. From the analysis above, a series of NCNT catalysts with tailored nitrogen contents and fractions of pyrrolic, pyridinic, and quaternary nitrogen species was synthesized via the adjustment of the amount of nitrogen source and calcination temperature. In addition, the surface area (in the range of 301–327 m2 g−1; Supporting Information, Figure S5) and ID/IG values (in the range of 2.4–2.9, Figure S5) were similar for all the NCNT catalysts.
The performances of the NCNT and CNT catalysts towards electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide were evaluated by controlled potential electrolysis (total current density) combined with reduction product analysis (Faradaic efficiency, FE, for reduction product). CO and H2 were the only reduction products detected by gas chromatography; no liquid-phase product was detected by nuclear magnetic resonance (Supporting Information, Figure S6). The electrocatalytic CO2 reduction performances of NCNT catalysts and CNT are summarized in Figure 2 a (total current density), 2 b (FE for CO), and 2 c (current density for CO production). Based on the FE results, CNTs mainly gave H2 as the main product (>98 %) with a small amount of CO (<2 %) at very negative potentials. After doping with nitrogen, the FE for CO production, total current density, and current density for CO production were improved dramatically. A maximum FE of 90 % for CO production was achieved using the NCNT-3-700 catalyst. These results suggest that nitrogen groups played an important role in CO2 reduction. The performance of the catalysts gradually improved in the order of NCNT-1-700 < NCNT-2-700 < NCNT-3-500 < NCNT-3-900 < NCNT-3-700.
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
The carbon dioxide electrocatalytic reduction performances of NCNTs and CNT in 0.5 m NaHCO3/CO2 at 25 °C. (a) The total current densities of NCNT catalysts and CNT at the applied potentials. (b) FEs of NCNT catalysts and CNT for the CO production at the applied potentials. (c) The current densities for CO production of NCNT catalysts and CNT (d) The stability test (total current density, FE and current density for CO production) of NCNT-3-700 catalyst at −0.9 V vs. RHE.
Durability is a critical concern in the evaluation of catalysts, especially for CO2 electrocatalytic reduction. Copper, tin, gold, palladium, and silver, as well as their alloys, are the most-investigated catalysts.2 However, a poor stability of much less than 10 h has been reported for metal-based catalysts.2 Stability tests of 9 to 20 h have been achieved with NCNFs,7a NCNTs,7b,7c and boron-doped nanodiamonds.7g From this point of view, doped nanocarbon materials should be more promising than metal-based catalysts. In the present work, the NCNT-3-700 catalyst showed a remarkable stability over 60 h at −0.90 V vs. RHE (Figure 2 d): the total current density and FE were maintained at stable values of about 5.8 mA cm−2 and 85 %, respectively, and the stabilized current density for CO production was around 5.0 mA cm−2. The performances (onset potential, FE, mass normalized current density for CO production and stability) are comparable to, or even higher than, those of metal-based or metal-free catalysts, with CO as the main product (Supporting Information, Table S1).
To explore the kinetics of CO2 electrocatalytic reduction on the NCNT catalyst, Tafel analyses were performed to further determine the intrinsic activity of NCNT catalyst for electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO. The Tafel relationship for CO2 electrocatalytic reduction could be derived as follows:4
Here, E is the applied potential; Eo is the equilibrium potential for the CO2/CO couple (−0.11 V vs. RHE); ŋ is the overpotential for the CO2/CO couple; α is the transfer coefficient; b is the Tafel slope; jo is the exchange current density; and jCO is the current density for CO production. A Tafel analysis for all of the NCNT catalysts is shown in Figure 3 a, and the obtained b as well as jo values are shown in Figure 3 b. The intrinsic activity, reflected in the form of decreased b and increased jo, was improved in the same order of NCNT-1-700 < NCNT-2-700 < NCNT-3-500 < NCNT-3-900 < NCNT-3-700. In the following, the two parameters above were used to explore the catalytic effect of each nitrogen species. The plots of b and jo values vs. the quaternary nitrogen content are shown in Figure 3 c and d, respectively. The b or jo value of all the NCNT catalysts approximately followed a linear relationship with the quaternary nitrogen contents, implying the functionality of the quaternary nitrogen. However, a similar relation was not observed on pyrrolic or pyridinic nitrogen species (Supporting Information, Figure S7).
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
(a) Tafel analysis on NCNT catalysts. (b) The obtained b and jo values of NCNT catalysts. Correlation of b (c) and jo values (d) of NCNT catalysts with their quaternary nitrogen contents.
The electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 can proceed through two-, four-, six-, eight-, or twelve-electron reduction pathways,2, 4b and thus CO2 may be reduced to various carbonaceous products, that is, CO, CxHy, or CxHyOz. A generally accepted mechanism was proposed by Hori et al.:4b the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 proceeds via an initial transfer of one electron to CO2 with the formation of the CO2.−*. Subsequently, the CO2.−* is further reduced to CO* with the participation of two protons and another electron. Next, the product composition of the CO2 reduction depends on the binding energy of CO, which is considered to be an important intermediate in the reduction of CO2.4b,4c Catalysts that strongly bind CO (e.g., platinum) produce few products because they are poisoned by CO and, consequently, H2 evolved from the competing water reduction is the main observed product.4c On the other hand, catalysts that bind CO weakly (e.g., silver,4d,4e gold,4f palladium,4g or copper–indium4h) produce mostly a CO gas product, before it can be further reduced to CxHy or CxHyOz. Having an intermediate binding energy for CO (e.g., copper) is believed to be the reason for the ability of some catalysts to catalyze the formation of CxHy or/and CxHyOz.4c,4i
Based on the studies of metal-based catalysts above, we considered the reaction mechanism of CO2 electrocatalytic reduction on CNT and NCNT through the adsorbed intermediates CO2.−* and CO*. The elemental reaction steps for the CO2 electrocatalytic reduction to CO are shown in Equations 1–3.
(1)
(2)
(3)
DFT calculations were performed to understand the relationship between the CO2 electrocatalytic reduction reactivity and the doped nitrogen species, according to the methodology proposed by Nørskov et al.10 The calculated Gibbs free energy diagrams for CO2 electrocatalytic reduction to CO on pristine CNTs and NCNTs at −0.4 V vs. RHE are shown in Figure 4 (see the Supporting Information for full details). For CNTs, the initial reduction barrier (uphill free energy) is too high to overcome. Because the relatively low adsorption energy of CO2.−* (Supporting Information, Figure S8, Table S2) hardly increases during the reaction, extra electrical energy is needed to lower the barrier, resulting in an extremely large overpotential at which hydrogen evolution is also promoted and dominates over CO2 reduction.7c This dependence of overpotential and energy barrier for generating CO2.−* is also supported by the b value (higher than 120 mv dec−1).4, 7a Therefore, CNTs exhibit a low yield of CO only at excessively negative potentials (Figures 2 a–c). The performance is expected to be improved by stabilizing CO2.−* and lowering the barrier, as proposed previously by the fabrication of nanostructure,4d the addition of co-catalyst,4e, 7a or the modification of catalyst surface.4f
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Calculated Gibbs free energy diagrams for CO2 electrocatalytic reduction to CO on pristine CNT and different nitrogen sites at −0.40 V vs. RHE.
For NCNTs, the activation of CO2 to form the CO2.−* is associated with downhill free energy of −0.05 eV on the pyrrolic nitrogen, −0.08 eV on the pyridinic nitrogen, and −0.30 eV on the quaternary nitrogen. The negative ΔG suggests that producing CO2.−* on all these nitrogen sites is possible at −0.4 V vs. RHE.10 Moreover, the limited overpotential10 as the threshold value for activating the CO2 molecule decreases with the increasing value of ΔG. It may be concluded that the formation of CO2.−* becomes easier from pyrrolic to pyridinic and further to quaternary nitrogen,10 and the main reason is the stronger adsorption energy of CO2.−* on the quaternary nitrogen (Figure S8, Table S2).4, 7a After the formation of CO2.−*, more downhill free energy is presented in the second step to produce CO*, implying that the conversion of CO2.−* to CO* is rather facile.4 Then CO, as the main gas product, is favorably produced with high FE instead of more reduced products (CxHy or CxHyOz), owing to the weak adsorption of CO (Supporting Information, Figure S9, Table S3).4, 7a, 10 As reflected by the free energy pathway, the most efficient nitrogen chemical state is quaternary nitrogen, followed by the pyridinic and pyrrolic nitrogen, which is consistent with the results in Figure 3 and results from Guo et al.8
In summary, a series of nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube (NCNT) materials with tailored nitrogen contents and varied fractions of pyrrolic, pyridinic, and quaternary nitrogen species is synthesized. The materials are characterized as catalysts for carbon dioxide electrocatalytic reduction and show excellent performances, with about 90 % current efficiency for carbon monoxide production and stability over 60 h. Calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) suggest that the improved intrinsic activity in the doped nanocarbon catalysts is achieved via the stabilization of the key intermediate CO2.−. Of the identified nitrogen species, the intrinsic activity seems to correlate best with the quaternary nitrogen. The present work may offer useful insights for the further design and development of nanocarbon catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support for this work from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21133010, 51221264, 21261160487, and 91545119), “Strategic Priority Research Program” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDA09030103) and a Tingsui Kê fellowship from Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences. The authors also acknowledge Dr. Bo Li for help with the DFT calculations.
Supporting Information
References