{'Abstract': 'The development of efficient and cheap bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) to be applied in rechargeable metal–air batteries and unitized generative fuel cells (URFCs) operated with alkaline electrolytes is highly crucial and challenging. Here we report high-performance bifunctional electrocatalysts of transition metal nanoparticles encapsulated in nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (M/N-CNTs, M = Fe, Co, and Ni). The optimized Co/N-CNT hybrid shows the highest efficient bifunctional catalytic activity and excellent stability towards both the ORR and OER. The oxygen electrode activity parameter ΔE (the criteria for judging the overall catalytic activity of bifunctional electrocatalysts) value for Co/N-CNTs is 0.78 V, which surpasses those of Pt/C and RuO2 catalysts and most of the non-precious metal based bifunctional electrocatalysts reported in the previous literature studies. Furthermore, excellent long-term catalytic durability holds great promise in fields of renewable energy applications.', 'Introduction': 'Presently, transition metal oxide based ORR/OER bifunctional catalysts have become promising alternatives due to the structural and compositional active sites of the oxygen evolving complex. However, their electrocatalytic ORR activities are unsatisfactory, possibly related to the strong bond strength between the OOH*/OH* intermediates and the metal active sites,17 along with poor electronic conductivity hampering the performance.18,19 It has been reported that doping with electron donors or supported on conducting materials can improve the conductivity, such as transition metal oxides with N-doped graphene as conducting materials.20,21,40 Recently, transition metals encapsulated in a carbon matrix were found to be conducive to improve the catalytic activity for the ORR/OER; Chen and co-workers reported that Fe nanoparticles encapsulated inside carbon nanotubes with appealing ORR and OER activity as advanced electrocatalysts.22 As reported in a series of studies, metal nanoparticles encapsulated in a carbon matrix possess a unique host–guest electronic interaction, which can tune the redox properties of the surrounding carbon layer, thus leading to the formation of catalytic functionalities.23 In addition, nitrogen-doping can further improve the catalytic activity, which can be ascribed to the synergistic catalytic effects of the metal nanoparticles and the N dopants,24 such as Co-incorporated N-doped reduced graphene oxide,25 Co-containing N-doped carbon aerogels26 and Co-embedded in N-doped carbon.27 In view of the need for bifunctional catalysts towards the ORR and OER for rechargeable metal–air batteries and URFCs, doping multiple components in a base catalyst such as carbon nanotubes is very necessary. On the one hand, the composites based on carbon can ameliorate the catalyst degradation by hosting the active sites and reducing the electric resistance of catalysts; on the other hand, the doping atom can provide more active sites for the ORR and OER.\nHerein, we report the synthesis of transition metal (Fe, Co, and Ni) nanoparticles encapsulated in nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (M/N-CNTs, M = Fe, Co, and Ni) via a solid-state thermal reaction. The precursors are suitable for large-scale fabrication due to their easy accessibility. The metal nanoparticles encapsulated in graphitic layers are dispersed at the endpoint of nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes. Due to the protection of graphitic layers, the metal nanoparticles are chemically stable, and thus the catalysts show superior long-term stability. The optimized Co/N-CNT catalyst shows the highest efficiency and robust performance towards both the ORR and OER under alkaline conditions, which can serve as a highly active electrocatalyst towards both the OER and ORR with long-term stability.', 'Experimental section': 'Chemicals\nMaterial synthesis\nMaterials characterization\nElectrochemical measurements', 'Results and discussion': 'We first pyrolyzed cobalt-containing samples to find the optimum pyrolysis temperature providing the highest oxygen electrode activity (Fig. S1†). It is obvious that cobalt-containing samples pyrolyzed at 700 °C yielded the highest catalytic activity towards both the ORR and OER. The previous study confirmed that the concentration of metal and nitrogen species of samples decreases as the pyrolysis temperature increases, with 700 °C providing the optimized catalysts.24 In addition, the decrease in catalytic activity appears to correlate well with the decreasing value of ID/IG obtained from Raman spectra (Fig. S2†); the ID/IG ratios of the materials decrease as the pyrolysis temperature increases, suggesting the decrease of significant structural defects or microstructural rearrangement of the atoms stemming from the presence of N dopants and the concomitant absence of C atoms in the structure of samples. Specifically, following the previous report,28 pyrolysis at 700 °C was confirmed to be the optimal synthesis condition both for the conductivity and the concentration of active species, resulting in high ORR and OER activity. Therefore, the M-encapsulated (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) in nitrogen doped carbon nanotube catalysts discussed below were all produced at 700 °C unless otherwise specified.\nFig. 2 shows the OER and ORR activities of Fe/N-CNTs, Co/N-CNTs, Ni/N-CNTs, MWCNTs, RuO2 and commercial Pt/C catalysts in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte (pH 13). Table 1 summarizes several parameters obtained from Fig. 2, including the OER potential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, the ORR half-wave potential (current density at −3 mA cm−2), and oxygen electrode activity for each of the catalysts (ΔE = EJ10,OER − EJ3,ORR). The Co/N-CNT catalyst shows the smallest potential gap, 0.78 V; this value is equal to the potential gap obtained using RuO2 as an OER catalyst where commercial Pt/C as an ORR catalyst (ΔE = EJ10,RuO2 − EJ3,Pt/C = 0.78 V). The above-mentioned results clearly indicate that the catalytic activities of materials as oxygen electrodes increase in the order of Ni/N-CNTs < Fe/N-CNTs < Co/N-CNTs, and the details will be discussed below. Furthermore, the Co/N-CNT catalyst shows the best activity as the oxygen electrode activity among the various bifunctional materials reported to date (Table S2†).\nDetails regarding the ORR activities of Fe/N-CNTs, Co/N-CNTs, Ni/N-CNTs, MWCNTs, RuO2 and commercial Pt/C catalysts were examined. As presented in Fig. 3a, data were obtained by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements, which show an expansion of the relevant part of Fig. 2. The ORR onset potentials of Fe/N-CNTs and Co/N-CNT catalysts were ∼0.96 V and 0.94 V, respectively, in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution; these values are slightly lower than those of the Pt/C catalyst (0.98 V). However, the half-wave potential of Co/N-CNTs (0.84 V) is more positive than the commercial Pt/C catalyst (0.82 V). In addition, the Fe/N-CNT catalyst shows comparable half-wave potential (0.81 V) to the Pt/C catalyst. In comparison of ORR activity with MWCNTs, the prepared M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts all exhibit improved ORR catalytic activity compared to MWCNTs, although the Ni/N-CNT catalyst shows the worst activity in terms of the onset potential (0.91 V) and the half-wave potential (0.73 V) of the prepared catalysts. Compared with the half-wave potentials of other reported non-precious-metal catalysts listed in Table S2,† the ORR half-wave potential value of Co/N-CNTs is the highest. To further investigate the ORR catalytic activities of M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts, typical LSVs using a rotating disk electrode (RDE) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at various rotating speeds were recorded. As shown in Fig. 3c, S6a and S7a,† the voltammetric profiles of M/N-CNTs (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) manifest typical increasing current density with higher rotation rates (from 400 to 1600 rpm). This result can be explained by the shortened diffusion distance at high speeds, which is in accordance with other studies.29 The corresponding Koutecky–Levich (K–L) plots (J−1vs. W−1/2) under different electrode potentials shown in Fig. 3d, S6b and S7b† are used to evaluate the transferred electron number per oxygen molecule in the ORR. The K–L plots of M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts display good linearity and their slopes remained almost constant over the potential range varying from 0.30 to 0.70 V, implying that the transferred electron number per oxygen molecule in the ORR at different electrode potentials was almost the same. The n values for Fe/N-CNT and Co/N-CNT catalysts were calculated by K–L equations from 0.30 to 0.70 V to be ∼3.85 and 3.90, respectively (Fig. 3d and S6b†). The high and steady electron transfer number values indicate that the Fe/N-CNT and Co/N-CNT catalysts favor a four-electron reduction process.30 Additionally, the n value for the Ni/N-CNT catalyst was calculated by using K–L equations to be ∼3.76 (Fig. S7b†), which demonstrates an apparent quasi-four-electron process in the Ni/N-CNT catalyst.16 This can be ascribed to the fact that Ni species bind O* and OH* so strongly on the surface that the proton-transfer steps become strongly activated, and thus slow the rate.28\nTo further investigate the potential application of the M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts as bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts, OER activities of M/N-CNTs (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) and MWCNTs, RuO2 and commercial Pt/C catalysts were evaluated by sweeping the RDE potential from 1.0 to 1.9 V (see the Experimental section for details), and the corresponding polarization curves are plotted in Fig. 4a. All the M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts afforded higher OER activity in terms of smaller overpotentials than the commercial Pt/C catalyst and MWCNTs. It can be seen that the Co/N-CNTs exhibit much earlier onset potential and greater current density than other prepared catalysts, which are comparable to those of the state-of-the-art RuO2 catalyst (Sigma-Aldrich). Usually, it is very meaningful to compare the overpotential (η) requirements for achieving a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is a metric relevant to solar fuel synthesis.31 In our case, Co/N-CNT, Fe/N-CNT and Ni/N-CNT catalysts achieved a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 0.39 V (vs. RHE), 0.52 V and 0.59 V, respectively. Obviously, the Co/N-CNT catalyst can afford current density at a small η, approaching the η requirement for the RuO2 catalyst (10 mA cm−2, 0.37 V). The OER kinetics of the above catalysts are further probed by using the Tafel slope. As shown in Fig. 5b, the resulting Tafel slopes are found to be ∼67, ∼76, ∼138, ∼69, and ∼149 mV dec−1 for Co/N-CNTs, Fe/N-CNTs, Ni/N-CNTs, RuO2, and commercial Pt/C catalysts, respectively. Here the Co/N-CNTs exhibit the smallest Tafel slope and are therefore the most efficient OER catalysts among all the catalysts in this study, suggesting the outstanding intrinsic OER kinetics of this kind of Co-encapsulated material compared with the RuO2 catalyst. Meanwhile, the better OER catalytic activity of Co/N-CNTs compared to the Fe/N-CNT and Ni/N-CNT catalysts demonstrated that the Co nanoparticles play an important role in excellent OER activity.\nThe morphology and microstructure of the prepared M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements. As shown in Fig. 5a and b, the Co/N-CNT catalyst exhibits typical bamboo-like carbon nanotubes with Co nanoparticles at endpoints of nanotubes. The Fe/N-CNT and Ni/N-CNT catalysts are also of this configuration (Fig. S8†). The high-resolution TEM (HRTRM) image in Fig. 5c verified that the nanotubes in the Co/N-CNT catalyst are ca. 3–4 nm thick multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). Co nanoparticles are quite inaccessible as they remain encapsulated in graphitic carbon layers even after treatment of the Co/N-CNT catalysts with 1 M H2SO4 over 16 h. Such a combination of small sized cobalt nanoparticles and dispersion in carbon will provide fast electron transport between the carbon matrix and the cobalt nanoparticles, leading to efficient electrical conductivity.27 The corresponding local amplification figure of a single Co nanoparticle encapsulated in the carbon shell is shown in Fig. 5d. Surrounding the Co nanoparticle, the carbon layers with a well-ordered arrangement are closely compacted forming a graphitic shell structure; the graphitic shells have lattice fringes with an interplanar spacing of 0.34 nm, corresponding to the (002) plane of graphite.16 The corresponding electron diffraction pattern of Co nanoparticles in Fig. 5c is presented in the inset of Fig. 5d, which shows the (010) and (200) planes of Co nanoparticles, indicating that the presence of metallic cobalt nanoparticles in Co/N-CNT catalysts. Notably, no carbon nanotubes were obtained when pure g-C3N4 instead of M2+-g-C3N4 (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) was used as a precursor under identical synthetic conditions. Previous studies have demonstrated that transition metals (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) could catalyze the formation of CNTs from a variety of organic precursors,32 and the growth of M/N-CNTs (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) is likely to occur via some decomposition intermediates of g-C3N4 aided by transition metal nanoparticles formed in situ from the M2+ ions in M2+-g-C3N4 (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) during pyrolysis.\nFig. 6a shows the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the Co/N-CNT catalyst; the sharp diffraction peak at 2θ = 26.5° corresponds to the (002) plane of the graphite structure, while the well-defined peaks at around 2θ = 44.3°, 51.6° and 75.8° match well with JCPDS card 15-0806, implying the presence of crystalline carbon and metallic cobalt in the Co/N-CNTs. No diffraction peaks of metal oxides, carbides and nitrides were observed, indicating there is only the presence of zerovalent state Co nanoparticles. The bulk elemental component of Co/N-CNT hybrids was analyzed by using an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (EDX). As shown in Fig. 6b, the EDX result shows that the C peak at 0.20 keV accompanied by an N tail peak, and three Co peaks at about 0.78, 6.91 and 7.64 keV corresponding to CoLα1, CoLβ1 and CoLγ1, respectively. The as-synthesized Co/N-CNTs are comprised of 7.92 wt% Co, 82.12 wt% C, 2.61 wt% O and 7.35 wt% N, respectively. Interestingly, on the basis of the assumption that all Co has transferred to Co3O4 and all C has been burnt out, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Fig. 6c) reveals that the Co/C atomic ratio and the wt% of Co in the Co/N-CNTs are found to be 2:100 and 8.83%, respectively, which are higher than those calculated from XPS (ca. 7.37 wt% converted from the 1.63 at% of Co (Table S1†). This is because XPS analysis is more sensitive to the surface chemical composition (ca. 5 nm), which could hardly detect Co nanoparticles encapsulated in the graphitic carbon layers.33 The N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm of the Co/N-CNT catalyst (Fig. 6d) exhibits a type-IV isotherm with a comparable high surface area of 329.41 m2 g−1. The distinct hysteresis loop in the large range of ca. 0.4 − 1.0P/P0 indicates the presence of mesoporous structure, which could also be seen from the pore size distribution (the inset of Fig. 6d), the mesoporous with a range value of 20–40 nm, this result is in good agreement with the SEM and TEM images of the Co/N-CNT catalyst. All similar results of the prepared Fe/N-CNT and Ni/N-CNT catalysts can also be obtained from the ESI.† The degrees of graphitization of M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts were confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. The integrated intensity ratio ID/IG for the D band (1300–1400 cm−1) and G band (1580–1650 cm−1) is widely used to quantify the defects in graphitic materials.30 As shown in Fig. S12,† the ratios of ID/IG were similar for three M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalysts.\nFor the doped element and bonding configurations to be further elucidated, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were conducted on three catalysts. As revealed in Table S1,† the survey of Co/N-CNTs demonstrates the presence of C 1s (87.78 at%), N 1s (8.36 at%), O 1s (2.21 at%) and Co 2p (1.63 at%) elements without any other element (Fig. 7a). The deconvolution of the C 1s spectrum displays four types of C species: 66.6% CC, 14.4% CN & C–O, 10.5% CO & C–N and 8.5% C–O–C, indicating the existence of carbon atoms connected to N and O heteroatoms (Fig. 7b).34 The deconvolution of the N 1s spectrum (Fig. 7c) shows the presence of two types of nitrogen species, which can be attributed to graphitic-N (57.79 wt%) and pyridinic-N (42.21 wt%) species in the Co/N-CNT catalyst. Notably, the pyridinic-N and graphitic-N have been recognized as active sites of the ORR in considerable studies.35 The Co 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 high-resolution spectra can be fitted with three components corresponding to Co(0), Co–Nx and the shake-up (satellites) peaks (Fig. 7d). The peaks are found at 778.2 eV and around 795 eV corresponding to the Co 2p3/2 binding energy and the Co 2p1/2 states, respectively, which are consistent with the cobalt element in the zerovalent state. The adjacent peak at 778.8 eV can be assigned to the Co–Nx moieties, which support the existence of the coordination between Co and Nx.16 Moreover, the high-resolution O 1s spectrum could be fitted into two peaks at 531.6 and 530.8 eV, which correspond to hydroxyls and carboxyls, respectively (inset of Fig. 7a). It is worth noting that the O high-resolution shows no signal related to cobalt oxides and the Co high-resolution spectra show no peaks consistent with Coδ (δ ≥ 2) species, which further demonstrates that Co nanoparticles encapsulated in graphitic carbon layers are not sensitive to an aerobic atmosphere to be oxidized.\nOther than high activity, the long-term stability is another critical parameter that determines the practicability of catalysts. The durability test for the Co/N-CNT catalyst was evaluated before and after 3000 cycles in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at room temperature at a sweep rate of 100 mV s−1 (Fig. 8a). The ORR polarization curve of the Co/N-CNT catalyst shows almost no change after 3000 cycles, which clearly indicates the superior stability of the Co/N-CNTs electrode in an alkaline environment. In addition, the durability tests for Co/N-CNTs and commercial Pt/C catalysts were also evaluated using chronoamperometric measurements at 0.6 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with a rotation rate of 900 rpm (Fig. S14†). The Pt/C catalyst shows a 45.7% decrease in activity after 11 h at 0.6 V. As a comparison, the Co/N-CNT catalyst retains a high relative current of 96.8% after 11 h. These results clearly indicate the superior stability of the Co/N-CNT catalyst than the commercial Pt/C catalyst in an alkaline environment, further indicating that the catalytically active sites on the Co/N-CNT catalyst are much more stable than those on the Pt/C electrode. Moreover, methanol tolerance is especially useful in a direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC), in which methanol crossing over the membrane from the anode to the cathode is one of the major barriers for further technology development and commercialization. The methanol crossover effects of Co/N-CNT and Pt/C catalysts were evaluated by chronoamperometric measurements at 0.6 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a rotation rate of 900 rpm with the addition of 1.0 M methanol (Fig. S13†). A significant drop in current appeared at the Pt/C electrode upon the addition of 3.0 M methanol. While for the Co/N-CNT electrode, no noticeable change was observed in the ORR current, suggesting a higher ORR selectivity and better tolerance to methanol crossover than the commercial Pt/C catalyst. The comparative ability to catalyze the ORR, superior long-term stability and ORR selectivity of Co/N-CNTs to Pt/C are likely due to the co-doping of Co and N, the coordination between the co-dopants, and the concomitant structural defects, which account for the catalytically active centers in the materials. Moreover, the catalytic durability of the Co/N-CNT catalyst towards the OER is evaluated by the time dependence of the current density at a fixed overpotential of 392 mV (Fig. 8b). The negligible loss of current density after 20 h demonstrates the superior durability of the Co/N-CNT catalyst. Obviously, the high stability is mainly attributed to the encapsulated Co nanoparticles in carbon to protect Co nanoparticles from leaching in the solution and maintain robustness for maintaining the stable catalytic reactions. Furthermore, the Co/N-CNT catalyst is an excellent representative of bifunctional oxygen-electrode catalysts through the comparison with some reported bifunctional electrocatalysts (Table S2†), showing great promise in the fields of URFCs and rechargeable metal–air batteries.\nThe data provide insights into the mechanism controlling the ORR and OER active sites in these bifunctional electrocatalysts. On the one hand, N doping has proven to be beneficial for the ORR because it can improve the electron donor–acceptor properties.44 Due to the higher electronegativity of N atoms than C atoms, electron transfer from adjacent C to N dopants will occur so that the strong electrostatic force between C and O facilitates O2 adsorption and dissociation on adjacent C atoms.13 N dopants can enhance the π-bonding of the carbon matrix owing to its lone pair of electrons. In addition, the transition metal nanoparticles interact with nitrogen dopants to form intimate bonds (M–Nx), and can generate more efficient catalytically active centers for the ORR to improve the catalytic performance.36 Furthermore, metal nanoparticles embedded in the carbon matrix have been reported to lower the local work function of the carbon surface due to the facile electron transfer from cobalt to carbon.24 More importantly, based on the fact that these three materials have similar CNT structure, elemental contents, nitrogen type, and BET surface, the ORR onset potential of the as-prepared M/N-CNT (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) catalyst differed depending on the metal species; we can come up with a hypothesis that the metal species have contributed to the ORR catalytic activity of the materials.\nOn the other hand, graphitic-N and pyridinic-N dopants are reported to be also active for the OER.37 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations indicated that OER overpotentials can be obviously decreased on graphitic-N and pyridinic-N structures, as N dopants have overall affinity for OER intermediates (O*, OH*, etc.) and thus can decrease their absorption free energy |ΔG|.38 For OER, due to the stronger electronegativity of N dopants, the positive C atoms can facilitate adsorption of OH− ions and promote electron transfer to intermediates.39 It is reported that transition metal–Nx and C–Nx are probably active sites to enhance the OER catalytic activity.37,38 Previous studies have also demonstrated that Co nanoparticles can highly improve the OER catalytic activity of materials,24,41 wherein Fe and Ni nanoparticles, to the best of our knowledge, are rarely used to serve as OER catalysts. It is mainly because of the intrinsic activity of metal species towards the OER. A deeper examination of this enhancement of OER activity is ongoing.\nBased on the above results, coupled with the recent studies on nitrogen-doped and/or metal-containing CNTs for electrocatalysis,31,39,42,43 the following synergistic catalytic effects between the N dopants and Co nanoparticles on Co/N-CNTs can be proposed to account for enhanced catalytic activity of Co/N-CNTs towards both the ORR and OER. (1) Owing to the relatively higher electronegativity of N compared with that of C, the N dopants in the Co/N-CNTs render higher positive charge density on their adjacent C atoms, by virtue of which these carbon atoms could become catalytically active sites. (2) The doped N atoms can improve the electron donor–acceptor properties and enhance the ð-bonding. Thus, the presence of nitrogen dopants in Co/N-CNTs would favor both the interaction, and thereby the reactivity, of reactants with the electrocatalyst. (3) The Co nanoparticles interact with nitrogen to form intimate bonds (Co–Nx), and can generate more efficient catalytically active centers to improve the catalytic performance. (4) The presence of metal Co nanoparticles inside CNTs could result in a decreased local work function on the carbon surface owing to their facile electron transfer from metal particles to the CNTs. (5) Co nanoparticles are essential to catalyze the formation of CNTs; encapsulated Co nanoparticles can be protected from leaching to stabilise the active sites.', 'Conclusions': '', 'Acknowledgements': 'Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257 RSC .\nJ. Zhang, P. Li, Z. Wang, J. Qiao, D. Rooney, W. Sun and K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1504 CAS .\nZ. Wen, S. Ci, Y. Hou and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nY. Shao, S. Park, J. Xiao, J. G. Zhang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 844 CrossRef CAS .\nP. W. Menezes, A. Indra, D. González-Flores, N. R. Sahraie, I. Zaharieva, M. Schwarze, P. Strasser, H. Dau and M. Driess, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2017 CrossRef CAS .\nY. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, S. Ci, S. Mao and J. H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 872 CrossRef CAS .\nP. Pei, K. Wang and Z. Ma, Appl. Energy, 2014, 128, 315 CrossRef CAS .\nY. Bing, H. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Ghosh and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2184 RSC .\nJ. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nB. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nM. Gao, Y. Xu, J. Jiang, Y. Zheng and S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nM. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Wiechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nH. Jiang, Y. Yao, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. Su, X. Yang and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21511 CAS .\nP. W. Menezes, A. Indra, D. González-Flores, N. R. Sahraie, I. Zaharieva, M. Schwarze, P. Strasser, H. Dau and M. Driess, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2017 CrossRef CAS .\nY. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, S. Ci, S. Mao and J. H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 872 CrossRef CAS .\nZ. Wang, S. Xiao, Z. Zhu, X. Long, X. Zheng, X. Lu and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4048 CAS .\nF. Calle-Vallejo, M. T. M. Koper and A. S. Bandarenka, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5210 RSC .\nT. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nM. Prabu, K. Ketpang and S. Shanmugam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3173 RSC .\nS. Chen, J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nS. Chen and S. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nZ. Wen, S. Ci, Y. Hou and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nD. Deng, L. Yu, X. Chen, G. Wang, L. Jin, X. Pan, J. Deng, G. Sun and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nX. Zou, X. Huang, A. Goswami, R. Silva, B. R. Sathe, E. Mikmeková and T. Asefa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nT. Kottakkat and M. Bron, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 2163 CrossRef CAS .\nK. Kreek, A. Sarapuu, L. Samolberg, U. Joost, V. Mikli, M. Koel and K. Tammeveski, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 2079 CrossRef CAS .\nY. Su, Y. Zhu, H. Jiang, J. Shen, X. Yang, W. Zou, J. Chen and C. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15080 RSC .\nJ. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886 CrossRef .\nP. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nY. Zhao, K. Kamiya, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 119, 2583 CAS .\nZ. Chen, A. Yu, R. Ahmed, H. Wang, H. Li and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 295 CrossRef CAS .\nY. Jun, W. Hong, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4270 CrossRef CAS .\nI. Y. Jeon, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, Z. Xia, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nL. Lin, Q. Zhu and A. W. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nM. Li, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Niu and Z. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66 CrossRef CAS .\nD. Deng, L. Yu, X. Chen, G. Wang, L. Jin, X. Pan, J. Deng, G. Sun and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nY. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2390 Search PubMed .\nJ. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nT. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nJ. Masa, W. Xia, I. Sinev, A. Zhao, Z. Sun, S. Grutzke, P. Weide, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nP. Chen, K. Xu, Z. Fang, Y. Tong, J. Wu, X. Lu, X. Peng, H. Ding, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 14923 CrossRef .\nH. T. Chung, J. H. Won and P. Zelenay, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1922 CrossRef PubMed .\nG. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .\nG. Tian, M. Zhao, D. Yu, X. Kong, J. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 2251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .', 'References': ''}