Angewandte Chemie
Forschungsartikel
Full Access
Unveiling the Electrolyte Cations Dependent Kinetics on CoOOH-Catalyzed Oxygen Evolution Reaction
Hongnan Jia, 
Na Yao, 
Can Yu, 
Hengjiang Cong, 
Prof. Dr. Wei Luo
First published: 21 October 2023 https://doi.org/10.1002/ange.202313886Citations: 1
SECTIONS
PDF
TOOLS
SHARE
Abstract
The electrolyte cations-dependent kinetics have been widely observed in many fields of electrocatalysis, however, the exact mechanism of the influence on catalytic performance is still a controversial topic of considerable discussion. Herein, combined with operando X-ray diffraction (XRD) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), we verify that the electrolyte cations could intercalate into the layer of pristine CoOOH catalyst during the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) process, while the bigger cations lead to enlarged interlayer spacing and increased OER activity, following the order Cs+>K+>Na+>Li+. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), in situ Raman, in situ Ultraviolet-visible (UV/Vis) spectroscopy, in situ XAS spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry (CV), and theoretical calculations reveal that the intercalation of electrolyte cations efficiently modify the oxidation states of Co by enlarging the Co−O bonds, which in turn enhance the d-band center of Co, optimize the adsorption strength of oxygen intermediates, facilitate the formation of OER active Co(IV) species, and reduce the energy barrier of the rate-determing step (RDS), thereby enhancing the OER activity. This work not only provides an informative picture to understand the complicated dependence of OER kinetics on electrolyte cations, but also sheds light on understanding the mechanism of other electrolyte cation-targeted electrocatalysis.
Introduction
With the energy crisis and severe climate change caused by over-consumption of fossil fuels, the development of efficient renewable energy conversion platforms is highly desirable. Electrocatalysis with the transformation between chemical energy and electricity, has been regarded as a promising pathway to store and utilize sustainable energy.1 Interestingly, the electrolyte cations have been proven to show significant effect on electrocatalytic reactions, including oxygen evolution/reduction (OER/ORR),2 hydrogen evolution/oxidation (HER/HOR),3 carbon dioxide reduction (CO2RR),4 methanol oxidation (MOR)5 and so on. More critically, the discrepant trends between catalytic activities and cation sizes have been observed in these reactions, whereas the exact role of electrolyte cations still remains debatable. For instance, the typically catalytic performance for CO2RR is in the order of Cs+>K+>Na+>Li+ on Au catalyst,4b while the HER performance trend commonly decreases from Li+ to Cs+ on Pt electrode.3b Consequently, identification of the cation-dependent kinetics in distinct electrolytes for cation-targeted electrocatalysis is of great significance, but remains challengeable.
Currently, cost-effective metal oxyhydroxides have been widely employed as the state-of-the-art catalysts for alkaline OER due to the high performance and stability.6 Kitchin and co-workers found that the activity of NiOOH follows the trend Cs+>K+≈Na+≈Li+, whereas the performance of NiFeOOH follows the trend K+≈Na+>Cs+>Li+.7 Therefore, unveiling the role of electrolyte cations on metal oxyhydroxides catalyzed OER is highly desirable, but still remains a hot topic of considerable discussion. In particular, Grimaud et al. pointed out that the interactions between electrolyte cations and surface oxygen at catalyst-water interface could explain the drastic catalytic discrepancies in the order of K+≈Na+≈TBA+>TMA+>Li+.8 Diaz-Morales attributed the cation-dependent OER performance to the variations in electrolyte basicity of the alkali hydroxides, which is responsible for the adsorption ability of oxygen-containing intermediates during OER process.2b Computational results from Huang et al. indicated that increasing the size of electrolyte cations could lead to cation overcrowding and decreased concentration of OH− near the negatively charged electrode surface, thereby resulting in unsatisfied catalytic performance.9 However, most of these studies have been focusing on the non-covalent interaction between electrolyte cations and OER intermediates, whereas the dynamic changes in the bulk phase structure of electrocatalysts, which could be modulated by cation intercalation during the OER process, has not been widely explored. Toroker and co-workers proposed that the electrolyte cations could insert into the layer of Ni(Fe)OOH, and resultant different bond length of cation-oxygen (Na−O, Li−O) is responsible for the enhanced OER performance, while the Ni−O and Fe−O distances are not significantly affected.10 Additionally, Koper et al. proposed that the formation of active superoxo intermediate (Ni−OO−) species can be stabilized better through bigger Cs+ cation due to the elongated Ni−O bond by using surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy, which is responsible for the higher OER performance.2c In spite of extensive advantages, there is a lack of deeply understanding the “dynamic structure-adsorption capacity-catalytic performance” relationship of metal oxyhydroxides for practical OER applications.
Herein, for the first time, we experimentally demonstrate the electrolyte cation intercalation in CoOOH during OER process by operando powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) and high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM). In different electrolytes, the OER activity of CoOOH follow the trend Cs+>K+>Na+>Li+. Combined experimental results including X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), in situ Raman, in situ Ultraviolet-visible (UV/Vis) spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, unveil that the biggest cation (Cs+) leads to the most elongated Co−O bond in phase structure among the tested electrolyte cations, thereby leading to the most easily formation of OER active Co(IV) species, which together with the increased d-band center of Co, enhanced adsorption capacity with oxygen-containing intermediates, and reduced energy barrier of rate-determing step (RDS), contributes to the enhanced OER performance.
Results and Discussion
Principle of Intrinsic Cation Effect
Figure 1a shows the schematic illustration of dynamic electrolyte cation intercalation in CoOOH with the applied OER potentials. Specifically, we speculate that the difference on alkali metal ion radius from Li+ (76 pm) to Cs+ (167 pm) would induce increased intercalation distances. Subsequently, the cation intercalation could obviously regulate the bond strength inside the CoOOH, which contributes to stretched Co−O bond. The elongated Co−O bonds may further lead to electron reallocation on the Co sites, thereby leading to the favorable adsorption capacity of oxygen-contained intermediates during the OER process. To further investigate the intrinsic cation effect, CoOOH electrocatalyst was prepared by a two-step hydrothermal method as previous report.6c The phase purity and crystallinity of the as-synthesized CoOOH were verified by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD). As displayed in Figure S1, the diffraction peaks can be well-indexed to the reported CoOOH pattern (PDF#07-0169). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of CoOOH reveals a layered morphology with uniform thickness (Figure S2). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image was employed to further confirm the layered morphology and crystallinity of the CoOOH catalyst (Figure S3). The identified interlayer spacing of 0.24 nm can be assigned to (101) crystal facet of CoOOH. Subsequently, the obtained CoOOH was used to evaluate the electrocatalytic performance under 1.0 M oxygen-saturated electrolytes with the presence of different cations in a standard three-electrode system. As shown in Figure 1b, an obvious enhancement effect of the alkali cations can be observed from the iR-corrected inear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves following the trend Cs+>K+>Na+>Li+, which is in accordance with the previous reports for Ni(Fe)OOH (Table S1).2c, 7 Specifically, compared to KOH (386 mV), NaOH (399 mV) and LiOH (406 mV), CoOOH in CsOH requires the smallest overpotential of 355 mV versus RHE to deliver the current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Figure 1c). Moreover, the cation effect of CoOOH can be also observed by Tafel slope with the gradual trend Cs+ (66 mV dec−1)<K+ (72 mV dec−1)<Na+ (84 mV dec−1)<Li+ (96 mV dec−1), indicating the favorable kinetics of CoOOH in CsOH under OER condition (Figure S4). Moreover, since the intercalation of bigger alkali cation may exposure more active sites and lead to higher surface area, we further assessed the electrochemical surface area (ECSA) of CoOOH in a series of alkali cation electrolytes via double-layer capacitance (Cdl) measurement (Figure S5). As shown in Figure S6, the CoOOH electrocatalyst in the different electrolytes display similar Cdl values, suggesting that the difference in activity arises from the intrinsic electrolyte cation effect. Note that further increasing the concentration of alkali cations without changing pH may not result in significant improvement in catalytic activity (Figure S7), which is consistent with the previous report.11 Furthermore, the CoOOH can operate stably over 150 h under different hydroxide electrolytes (from Li+ to Cs+) at current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Figure S8), representing that slight cation intercalation would not significantly influence the stability of CoOOH electrocatalyst.
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Principle of intrinsic cation effect in CoOOH electrocatalyst through cation intercalation. (a) The schematic illustration of alkali cation intercalation and elongated Co−O bonds in CoOOH under applied potential. (b) The iR-corrected LSV curves of CoOOH in 1.0 M LiOH, NaOH, KOH and CsOH at oxygen-saturated atmosphere. (c) The corresponding overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2.
Identification of Cation Intercalation in CoOOH
Operando PXRD analysis was applied to track the electrolyte cations intercalation on CoOOH during the OER process. Figure S9 displays the schematic diagram of experimental setup for collecting operando PXRD patterns of CoOOH in alkaline electrolytes under different potentials. Referring to past report, the Ni foam was used as the substrate to support the CoOOH electrocatalyst to exclude the masking effect of carbon cloth.12 The diffraction peak located at ≈20° could be attributed to the 003 plane of CoOOH at open circuit voltage (OCV) state. For the hexagonal CoOOH, the 003 crystal plane can directly reflect the information of layer spacing. As shown in Figure 2a and Figure S10, with the increase of applied potential from OCV to 1.8 V, the diffraction peaks of 003 plane for CoOOH under these four electrolytes all slightly shift to lower angles, suggesting the increased layer spacing caused by cation intercalation. It is worth noting that, when the applied OER potential returns to OCV, the offset PXRD peaks are maintain well, indicating the formation of a relatively stable intercalation structure (named CoOOH−M+). Figure 2b and Figure S11 display the comparison of PXRD patterns of CoOOH after OER process under 1.0 M electrolytes with the presence of different cations for three experimental repeats. The diffraction degree of 003 plane exhibit an obvious trend of CoOOH−Cs+<CoOOH−K+<CoOOH−Na+<CoOOH−Li+, indicating that bigger cation can induce lager interlayered spacing. Meanwhile, after thorough cleaning of the electrocatalysts after OER process, signals of cations still could be observed in the near-surface by analysis of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), further confirming that the CoOOH structure could be maintained to a certain extent after cationic intercalation (Figure S12).
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
The investigation of cation intercalation and structure evolution of CoOOH. (a) Operando PXRD patterns collected on CoOOH in 1.0 M CsOH electrolyte at different potentials. The b) PXRD patterns and c-f) HRTEM images of CoOOH−Li+, CoOOH−Na+, CoOOH−K+ and CoOOH−Cs+.
In addition, TEM images indicate that the CoOOH electrocatalyst maintains nanosheets morphology after cationic intercalation (Figure S13). Subsequently, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images were conducted to further visualize the variation of layer spacing in CoOOH. As displayed in Figures 2c–2f and S14–S18, lattice fringes can be observed clearly in CoOOH−M+, where the interplanar spacing around 0.24 nm could be assigned to the 101 plane of CoOOH. From the perspective of crystal structure, we considered that the 101 crystal plane also carries the details of c axis, and could be associated with the information of layer spacing (Figure S19). Obviously, CoOOH−Cs+ exhibits the largest crystal plane spacing (0.264 nm) compared with the 101 planes of CoOOH−K+ (0.258 nm), CoOOH−Na+ (0.255 nm), CoOOH−Li+ (0.251 nm) and CoOOH (0.241 nm) (Figures 2c–2f and S20). Similarly, the comparision of 003 crystal facet of CoOOH−M+ also clearly displays the increasing interplanar spacing, which further confirms the effctively intercalation of alkaline cations (Figure S21). These results unveil that the bigger electrolyte cation radius could lead to more lattice expansion of pristine CoOOH, which is consistence with operando PXRD analysis. Moreover, the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping of CoOOH−M+ display that Co, O and M (M=Li, Na, K or Cs) elements are uniformly distributed (Figures S22–S25). As expected, the obvious signals of cations further confirm that the alkaline cations are introduced into the CoOOH and form the relatively stable structure of CoOOH−M+. Then we deconvoluted the high-resolution O 1s XPS spectrum of CoOOH−M+ to further identify the chemical bonds between alkali metal and oxygen atoms (Figure S26). In detail, the lattice oxygen in O 1s XPS spectra contains three fitting peaks, including Co−O (529.9 eV),13 Co−OH (531.2 eV)14 and Co−O-cation (530.9 eV),15 demonstrating the formation of Co−O-cation bonds in CoOOH−M+. Such precise cation intercalation can effectively modulate the local environment of active Co sites through the charge transfer of the formed Co−O-cation bridge and there promote the reaction kinetics. Combined operando PXRD and HRTEM images reveal the fact of cation intercalation and the increase of layer spacing, which may have a potential effect on the structure and properties of layered CoOOH−M+.
XAS Characterization and Structural Investigation
The intercalated change motivated us to further survey the inherent structural information and interatomic distance of CoOOH by X-ray adsorption spectroscopy (XAS) techniques (Figures S27–S29). As shown in Figures 3a and S27–S29, the adsorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra of Co K-edge manifest that the trend of adsorption threshold position is CoOOH−Cs+>CoOOH−K+>CoOOH−Na+>CoOOH−Li+>CoOOH>Co foil. In details, the average oxidation states of CoOOH−M+ samples are fitted to be +3.06 (Li+), +3.14 (Na+), +3.23 (K+) and +3.37 (Cs+), demonstrating the increased Co valence caused by cation intercalation (Figure 3b). This trend could be further confirmed by the deconvoluted Co 2p XPS analysis (Figure S30), showing the increased proportion of Co4+ from CoOOH−Li+ (27.8 %) to CoOOH−Cs+ (38.3 %). In fact, the charge redistribution of Co sites is due to the slightly elongated Co−O bonds derived from the formation of M−O bonds after cation intercalation. Figure 3c exhibits the Fourier-transformed k3-weighted extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra signals recorded for different CoOOH−M+. The peaks located at ≈1.5 Å and ≈2.5 Å can be ascribed to the Co−O bond and Co−Co bond, respectively.16 Among them, the Co−O bond length manifest a gradually increasing trend from pristine CoOOH to CoOOH−Cs+. Specifically, to reveal the quantitative change in Co−O bonds, Co−O curvefits were performed on Co EXAFS of these CoOOH−M+, where satisfactory fittings were achieved for all these electrocatalysts (Figure S31). Compared with pristine CoOOH, the CoOOH−M+ electrocatalysts display elongated average Co−O bonds in the order CoOOH−Cs+ (1.959 Å)>CoOOH−K+ (1.949 Å)>CoOOH−Na+ (1.945 Å)>CoOOH−Li+ (1.942 Å)>CoOOH (1.930 Å) (Figure 3d and Table S2). Furthermore, wavelet transform (WT) was applied to combine both R- with k-space information and distinguish the backscattering atoms.17 As Figure 3e shown, the contour intensity maximum at about (1.5 Å, 7.5 Å−1) is ascribed to the Co−O bond. A pronounced higher shift could be observed from pristine CoOOH to CoOOH−Cs+, well matching the above results that cations with larger atomic numbers would induce longer Co−O bonds in CoOOH−M+ structure. Importantly, the elongated Co−O bond could reduce the electron density near the active Co sites, which is conducive to enhance the valence state of the active Co sites and optimize the adsorption of oxygen-containing intermediate species.
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
XAS characterization and structural investigation of CoOOH−M+. (a) XANES spectra at Co K-edge of Co foil, CoOOH and CoOOH−M+. (b) Oxidation state of Co species obtained from Co K-edge XANES (three experimental repeats). (c) The Fourier-transformed k3-weighted EXAFS signals recorded for different CoOOH−M+. (d) The fitting Co−O bond length data of CoOOH−M+ (with three experimental repeats). (e) Comparison of Co K-edge EXAFS WTs recorded for the CoOOH−M+. The vertical dashed lines are drawn to guide the observation of the trend of the Co−O bonds.
In situ Spectroscopic Analysis
Currently, in situ techniques have demonstrated that the CoOOH would further undergo an oxidization process during OER operation, where the genernated *O−Co(IV) are considered to be the real active species toward OER.6c, 18 Therefore, the increased valence state of Co sites (as discussed in XAS section) inspired us to explore the intrinsic mechanism of electrolyte cation effect in CoOOH by in situ tracking the formation of high-valent Co species. Firstly, in situ Raman data were collected to probe the occurrence potential of *O−Co(IV) under different electrolytes (Figures 4a and S32). According to previous reports, the peaks located at ≈450 and 550 cm−1 can be assigned to the signals of *HO−Co(III) and *O−Co(IV), respectively.19 Taken CsOH as an example, when the applied potential rises to 1.55 V, a peak located at 572 cm−1 can be observed, suggesting the generation of *O−Co(IV) sites (Figure 4a). Figures 4b and 4c show that the occurrence potential of *O−Co(IV) gradually decreases (from 1.55 V to 1.47 V) as the size of electrolyte cation increased (from Li+ to Cs+). Similar cation-dependence of Co valence conversion was observed by in situ UV/Vis spectra for CoOOH under different electrolytes. As the spectra of CoOOH depicted in Figures 4d and S33, with the increasing potentials, the peaks appeared at around 510 nm corresponding to the signal of high-valent Co can be observed.20 It was noting that the trend in conversion potential from *HO−Co(III) to *O−Co(IV) retains Cs+>K+>Na+>Li+, underlying that there is an internal cation-dependence on the formation of actual active sites for CoOOH (Figure 4e). Specially, the CoOOH under CsOH possesses much lower potential (1.47 V) for the formation of *O−Co(IV) than other cations (1.49 V for K+, 1.50 V for Na+ and 1.52 V for Li+, respectively), demonstrating the favorable formation of active *O−Co(IV) species of CoOOH in CsOH (Figure 4f). In addition, Figure 4g displays the CV curves in the potential range of 1.10–1.65 V versus RHE of CoOOH under 1.0 M electrolytes with the presence of different cations. The redox peaks corresponding to the oxidation of Co from *HO−Co(III)/*O−Co(IV) can be observed in the CV curves of CoOOH under different electrolytes. Specifically, the CoOOH under 1.0 M CsOH exhibits the lowest *HO−Co(III)/*O−Co(IV) conversion potential, indicating the most favorable kinetics to form reactive *O−Co(IV) species, which are consistent with the result of the above in situ measurement (Figure 4h). Moreover, changes in the local electronic and atomic structures of the metal sites inside CoOOH under OER potential were monitored by in situ XAS spectroscopy. As shown in Figure 4i, compared with OCP state, obviously positive shifts of absorption edge can be observed when arising applied potential to 1.5 V, indicating more readily formed high-valent Co species under hydroxide electrolyte with larger cations. Besides, the Co valence state and Co−O bond length follow the trend of KOH>NaOH>LiOH (Figure S34), further confirming the structural evolution discussed above. In sum, combination of CV, in situ Raman spectroscopy, in situ UV/Vis spectroscopy and in situ XAS spectroscopy characterization techniques, allows us to evaluate the formation potential of active *O−Co(IV) sites during the OER operation at the electrode interface. As shown in Figure 4h, the CoOOH under CsOH is more readily to form high-valent *O−Co(IV) species, which is responsible for the enhanced OER electrocatalysis.
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
In situ spectroscopic analysis for CoOOH to evaluate the formation potential of active *O−Co(IV) sites. (a) In situ Raman spectra and (d) in situ UV/Vis spectra of CoOOH catalyst under 1.0 M CsOH at different applied potentials; Comparison of the formation potential from *HO−Co(III) to *O−Co(IV) under 1.0 M LiOH, NaOH, KOH and CsOH according to (b–c) in situ Raman and (e–f) in situ UV/Vis results; (g) CV curves in the potential range of 1.10–1.65 V versus RHE of CoOOH under 1.0 M electrolyte with the presence of different cations. (h) Comprehensive integration of the formation potential from *HO−Co(III) to *O−Co(IV) in different electrolyte according to CV, in situ Raman and in situ UV/Vis results. (i) In situ XAS characterization of CoOOH under 1.0 M hydroxide electrolytes. The signal of CoOOH under CsOH electrolyte can not be collected because of the strong X-ray adsorption of CsOH.
DFT Calculations
Figure 5a shows the experimental activity trend of CoOOH in alkaline metal cations is in good agreement with Co oxidation state and Co−O bond length. Specifically, after intercalated by cations (from Li+ to Cs+), the OER activity of pristine CoOOH is significantly enhanced with the increased Co oxidation state, accompanied by the variation in Co−O bond length. Notably, the increase of Co valence state reduces the activation energy to generate *O−Co (IV) species under OER potential, which is consistent with the in situ Co(IV) capture experiments (Figure 4), unveiling the origin of higher OER activity in alkaline electrolyte with bigger cation. Moreover, as shown in Figure 5b, the highest Co oxidation state of CoOOH−Cs+ could lead to the most upshifted Co 3d band center, thereby resulting in strengthened oxygen-contained intermediates adsorption and promoted the OER kinetics. To reveal the impact of different cation intercalation on the catalytic process (Figure S35), the reaction pathway was further conducted on a series CoOOH−M+ (M=Li, Na, K, Cs). As shown in Figures S36–S39, we modeled and optimized the CoOOH−M+ electrocatalysts referred to past reports to perform the DFT calculations.2b, 10 Firstly, the d orbital density of states (DOS) on CoOOH−M+ were established to predict the adsorption strength of oxygen intermediate species during OER process. The results shown in Figure 5c uncover that the trend of calculated d-band center of Co atom in different CoOOH−M+ (M=Li, Na, K, Cs) close to the Fermi level is Li+ (−2.18 eV)<Na+ (−2.13 eV)<K+ (−2.09 eV)<Cs+ (−2.07 eV), indicating the order of the ability to adsorb oxygen intermediates is Li+<Na+<K+<Cs+. In order to provide insight into the effect of different cation intercalation on the electron density of active atoms, the structures of M−O−Co (M=Li, Na, K, Cs) with the bond length calculations were shown in Figure 5d. Owing to the difference of atomic radius and electron density of the alkali metal cations, the length of the M−O and Co−O bonds are increased slightly with the increased atomic radius, which is in consistent with the experimental analysis. These results show that cation intercalation can regulate the bond strength inside the CoOOH, which is closely connected to the surface electron density of the atom and the related adsorption and desorption properties. Consequently, Mulliken charge calculations display that the Co atoms in CoOOH−Cs+ possess the most positive charge (Figure S40), indicating the electron cloud density on Co is decreased with the increased interlayer Co−O bond length, which is beneficial to enhance the adsorption of oxygen intermediates.21 In addition, the charge-density contour maps for *O−CoOOH−M+ and corresponding local charge density difference analysis for adsorbed oxygen are displayed in Figure 5e, obviously, the electrons of Co atom for CoOOH−Cs+ are inclined to flow toward the *O species to form an optimized *O−Co bond. Additionally, to reveal the impact of active electron modulation on the catalytic process, the energy profiles of the reaction pathway were further calculated. The energy profiles of the reaction pathway in the Figure 5f show that the rate-determining step (RDS) for CoOOH−M+ are all the O* to OOH* step, indicating the OER reaction is strongly related to the binding abilityof O*(oxo) intermediate. As expected, the calculated energy barrier of RDS on CoOOH−Cs+ (1.679 eV) is significantly decreased compared to that of CoOOH−K+ (1.731 eV), CoOOH−Na+ (1.757 eV) and CoOOH−Li+ (1.904 eV), which completely consist with the experiment results that CoOOH−Cs+ shows the best OER activity.
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
DFT theoretical calculations for CoOOH−M+ to explain the intrinsic cation effect. (a) The variation of experimental overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 with Co oxidation states and Co−O bond length. (b) Illustration of molecular orbital energy from CoOOH−Li+ to CoOOH−Cs+. (c) d-DOS plots of Co sites in CoOOH−M+ (M=Li, Na, K, Cs). (d) The length of the M−O bond and Co−O bond in CoOOH−M+ (M=Li, Na, K, Cs). (e) Charge-density contour map for *O−CoOOH−M+ (Inset: local charge density difference analysis for adsorbed oxygen). (f) The calculated energy barriers diagram for CoOOH−M+ (M=Li, Na, K, Cs).
In addition, this work may provide insights and inspiration to promote the generation of high-valent metal active species, with the expectation of achieving efficient alkaline OER electrocatalysis for potential industrialization (Figures S41–S42).
Conclusion
In summary, we propose that the electrolyte cations dependent kinetics on CoOOH catalyzed OER is derived from cation intercalation, which can rationally tailor the formation energy of high-valent OER-active *O−Co(IV) species during OER process. Electrochemical experiments show the influence of electrolyte cations on OER activity follow the trend in cation size, increasing from small (Li+) to large (Cs+) cations. Operando PXRD, HRTEM and XAS results indicate the cation intercalation induces the enhancement of interlayer of pristine CoOOH in the order Cs+>K+>Na+>Li+, thereby leading to highest Co valence state and most elongated Co−O bonds on CoOOH−Cs+. In situ Raman, in situ UV/Vis, CV measurements and theoretical calculations reveal that CoOOH−Cs+ displays the lowest formation energy of *O−Co(IV) species and lowest energy barrier of RDS step, which are responsible for the enhanced OER performance. This work underlines the role of electrolyte cations for cation-dependent OER kinetics on CoOOH, and opens up a new perspective for in-depth understanding the catalytic mechanism toward other cation-targeted electrocatalysis for more applications.
Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22272121, 21972107), and National Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2020CFA095). We thank the Core facility of Wuhan University for the measurement of XPS. We also thank the Core Research Facilities of College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences for the measurement of TEM. We acknowledge the great help from Prof. L. Zhuang and co-workers at Wuhan University for helpful measurements and discussion. We thank the Anhui Absorption Spectroscopy Analysis Instrument Co, Ltd. for XAFS measurements and analysis. The numerical calculations in this paper have been done on the supercomputing system in the Supercomputing Center of Wuhan University.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Open Research
Supporting Information
References
Citing Literature