{
  "0": "Platinum (Pt) nanoparticles have long been regarded as the best catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells, though the Pt-based electrode still suffers from its susceptibility to time-dependent drift and CO deactivation. (1−3) Furthermore, the high cost of the Pt catalysts, together with the limited reserves of Pt in nature, has been shown to be the major “showstopper” to mass market fuel cells for commercial applications. That is why the large-scale practical application of fuel cells has not been realized, though alkaline fuel cells with platinum as an ORR electrocatalyst were developed for the Apollo lunar mission in the 1960s. (4) Along with recent intensive research efforts in reducing or replacing Pt-based electrodes in fuel cells, (3,5−11) we have found that vertically aligned nitrogen-containing carbon nanotubes (VA-NCNTs) produced by pyrolysis of iron(II) phthalocyanine (a metal heterocyclic molecule containing nitrogen), (12) in either the presence or absence of additional NH3 vapor, (3) could act as effective metal-free ORR electrocatalysts. The metal-free VA-NCNTs were shown to catalyze a four-electron ORR process free from CO “poisoning” with a 3-time higher electrocatalytic activity, smaller crossover effect, and better long-term operation stability than that of commercially available Pt-based electrodes (C2−20, 20% platinumonVulcanXC-72R; E-TEK) in alkaline electrolytes. (3) On the basis of the experimental observations and quantum mechanics calculations, we attributed the improved catalytic performance to the electron-accepting ability of the nitrogen atoms, which creates a net positive charge on adjacent carbon atoms in the nanotube carbon plane of VA-NCNTs to readily attract electrons from the anode for facilitating the ORR. (3) Uncovering this new ORR mechanism in nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube electrodes is significant as the same principle could be applied to the development of various other metal-free efficient ORR catalysts for fuel cell applications.\nThe recent discovery of graphene has opened up a new era of 2-dimensional (2D) fundamental science and potential technology. (13−15) As mother of all graphitic forms, graphene is a building block for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities, such as 0D buckyballs, 1D nanotubes, and 3D graphite. Having many similarities to carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in structure and property, including its high aspect ratio (the ratio of lateral size to thickness), large surface, rich electronic states, and good mechanical properties, graphene is an attractive candidate for potential uses in many areas where the CNTs have been exploited. Superior to CNTs, the one atomic-thick graphene sheets with a 2D planar geometry will further facilitate electron transport, (16) and hence the more effective electrode materials.\nAlthough CNTs and their N-doped counterparts have been synthesized and studied for some years, the large-scale preparation of graphene sheets by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is only the recent development. (17,18) More recently, attempts have been made to introduce heteroatoms (e.g., nitrogen) into graphene sheets for modulation of their electronic properties. (19) As far as we are aware, however, the possibility for nitrogen-containing graphene sheets (N-graphene, we designate the N-free graphene as C-graphene for convenience) to be used as catalysts for the ORR process in fuel cells has not been exploited. In the present study, we investigated the CVD-deposited N-graphene sheets for ORR at the cathode in alkaline fuel cells. As we shall see later, the N-graphene showed a much better electrocatalytic activity, long-term operation stability, and tolerance to crossover and poison effects than the commercially available platinum-based electrodes (C2−20, 20% platinumonVulcanXC-72R; E-TEK) for oxygen reduction.\nIn this study, we used a modified CVD process (17) for the synthesis of N-graphene films. Briefly, a thin layer of nickel (∼300 nm) was deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate by sputter coating. The Ni-coated SiO2/Si wafer was then heated up to 1000 °C within a quartz tube furnace under a high purity argon atmosphere. Thereafter, a nitrogen-containing reaction gas mixture (NH3:CH4:H2:Ar = 10:50:65:200 standard cubic centimeters per minute) was introduced into the quartz tube and kept flowing for 5 min, followed by purging with a flow of NH3 and Ar only for another 5 min. The sample was then rapidly moved out from the furnace center (1000 °C) under Ar protection. The resultant N-graphene film can be readily etched off from the substrate by dissolving the residual Ni catalyst layer in an aqueous solution of HCl, (17,18) allowing the free-standing N-graphene sheets to be transferred onto substrates suitable for subsequent investigation.\nFigure 1a shows a free-standing film of ca. 4 cm2 in size floating on water after removing the nickel layer by HCl. Just like CVD-synthesized C-graphene films, (17) the N-graphene film thus produced is flexible and transparent, consisting of only one or a few layers of the graphite sheets. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of this N-graphene film shows a flat flake-like surface (Supporting Information, Figure S1). Atomic force microscopic (AFM) scanning image given in Figure 1b shows a smooth surface with wrinkles due to its pliability. The layered structure revealed in Figure 1c enabled us to directly analyze the layer thickness, which was found to be in the range of 0.9−1.1 nm, consistent with previous studies. (14,20−23)\nFigure 1\n\nThe substrate-free N-graphene sheets can be directly transferred onto TEM grids for further characterization. As shown in Figure 2a, TEM images also revealed flat flakes, resembling those seen in Figures 1b,c. Unlike most C-graphene films of symmetric hexagonal diffraction patterns, (18,24) electron diffraction of the N-graphene film (inset of Figure 2a) shows a ringlike diffraction pattern with dispersed bright spots. The above observed difference indicates that the otherwise crystalline graphene sheets became partially mis-orientated in the N-graphene film due to structure distortions caused by the intercalation of nitrogen atoms into its graphitic plans, as also seen for N-doped CNTs. (3) The cross-sectional view of the suspended edge of the as-synthesized N-graphene film shows, once again, only a few layers (typically, 2−8 layers) of graphene sheets (Figures 2b-d). Adjacent interlayer distances in the N-graphene film were measured to be 0.3−0.4 nm, close to the d-spacing of (002) crystal plane (0.335 nm) of bulk graphite with slight distortion. (25)\nFigure 2\n\nRaman spectra of the as-synthesized N-graphene sheets with different layer numbers are given in Figure 2e. Similar to C-graphene films, (17,18,24) the G band and 2D band of the N-graphene samples were found to be sensitive to the layer number. For comparison, Raman spectra for both the N-graphene and C-graphene films were given in Supporting Information, Figure S2, which revealed a relatively higher D band for the N-graphene than that of C-graphene film due to structural distortion caused by N-doping. However, the very low value of 0.06−0.25 for the ID/IG (a peak intensity ratio of the D to G band) (18) indicates that the N-graphene layers remain a high crystalline quality. This is further evidenced by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) profiles shown in Supporting Information, Figure S3, in which a pronounced (002) peak at 26° characteristic of C-graphene was also seen for N-graphene. The broad background band centered at 26° can be attributable to the presence of intercalated “N defects” in the N-graphene structure. The slight shift of the (002) peak from 26.5°, characteristic of C-graphene, to 26.1° for N-graphene seen in the inset of Supporting Information, Figure S3 suggests that the N-doping has also led to an increased interlayer spacing for the N- graphene film. From the (002) diffraction peak positions, we calculated the d-spacing for the N-graphene film to be 3.41 Å. This value is in good agreement with the TEM measurements, but still slightly higher than that of C-graphene film (3.36 Å) (Supporting Information, Figure S3) and graphite (3.35 Å). (26)\nTo probe nitrogen atoms in the N-graphene structure, we carried out X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) measurements. As can be seen in Figure 3, the XPS survey spectrum for the N-graphene shows a predominant narrow graphitic C 1s peak at 284.2 eV, (27,28) along with a N 1s peak at ca.400 eV. Figure S4 shows the XPS survey spectra for both the N-graphene and C-graphene over a wide range of binding energies (0−1000 eV). In addition to the C 1s and N 1s peaks, an O 1s peak at ca. 540 eV was also observed for both N-graphene and C-graphene, (29,30) possibly due to the incorporation physically adsorbed oxygen as in the case with CNTs. (28,31) Thus, the higher O 1s peak relative to the corresponding C 1s peak seen for the N-graphene than that of the C-graphene suggests a stronger O2 adsorption on the former, an additional advantage as the ORR electrode. The absence of any Ni peak in the XPS spectrum for the N-graphene clearly indicates that the Ni catalyst residues, if any, have been completely removed by the HCl solution. The high resolution XPS N 1s spectrum given in the inset of Figure 3 reveals the presence of both pyridine-like (∼398.3 eV) and pyrrolic (∼400.5 eV) nitrogen atoms within the graphene structure; (32−35) both play roles in the ORR process. (3) Similar to N-doped carbon nanotubes, (3,36) therefore, N atoms have been incorporated into the graphene hexagon rings, as reflected by the pyridine-like XPS N 1s peak at ca. 398.3 eV. The N/C atomic ratio was calculated to be ca. 4 atomic %, which is close to that of the N-doped carbon nanotubes used for ORR study in our previous work. (3)\nFigure 3\n\nWe performed the rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) voltammograms to investigate electrocatalytic activities of the N-graphene film for ORR in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. The C-graphene film prepared under the same CVD conditions, but without the introduction of NH3 gas, and commercially available Pt-loaded carbon (Vulcan XC-72R) supported by a glassy carbon electrode (Pt/C) were also investigated for comparison. Just like the pure CNT electrode without N-doping, (3) the C-graphene electrode shows a two-step, two-electron process for oxygen reduction with the onset potential of about −0.45 and −0.7 V (Figure 4a). Unlike the C-graphene electrode, the N-graphene electrode (Figure 4a) exhibited a one-step, four-electron pathway for the ORR, as is the case with N-doped CNTs. (3) The steady-state catalytic current density at the N-graphene electrode was found to be ca. 3 times higher than that of the Pt/C electrode over a large potential range (Figure 4a). The transferred electron number (n) per oxygen molecule at the N-graphene electrode was calculated by Koutecky−Levich (K−L) equation (37) to be 3.6−4 at the potential ranging from −0.4 to −0.8 V (Supporting Information, Figure S5). These results indicate that the N-graphene electrode, similar to its CNT counterpart, (3) is a promising metal-free catalyst for the ORR in an alkaline solution.\nFigure 4\n\nThe N-graphene electrode was further exposed to fuel molecules (e.g., methanol) and CO to test the possible crossover and poison effects. (38,39) We measured electrocatalytic selectivity of the N-graphene electrode against the electro-oxidation of various commonly used fuel molecules, including hydrogen gas, glucose, and methanol (Figure 4b). Also included in Figure 4b is the corresponding current density (j)−time (t) chronoamperometric response at a Pt/C electrode for comparison. As shown in Figure 4b, a 40% decrease in current appears at the Pt/C electrode upon the addition of 2% (w/w) methanol. However,",
  "1": " at the N-graphene electrode was found to be ca. 3 times higher than that of the Pt/C electrode over a large potential range (Figure 4a). The transferred electron number (n) per oxygen molecule at the N-graphene electrode was calculated by Koutecky−Levich (K−L) equation (37) to be 3.6−4 at the potential ranging from −0.4 to −0.8 V (Supporting Information, Figure S5). These results indicate that the N-graphene electrode, similar to its CNT counterpart, (3) is a promising metal-free catalyst for the ORR in an alkaline solution.\nFigure 4\n\nThe N-graphene electrode was further exposed to fuel molecules (e.g., methanol) and CO to test the possible crossover and poison effects. (38,39) We measured electrocatalytic selectivity of the N-graphene electrode against the electro-oxidation of various commonly used fuel molecules, including hydrogen gas, glucose, and methanol (Figure 4b). Also included in Figure 4b is the corresponding current density (j)−time (t) chronoamperometric response at a Pt/C electrode for comparison. As shown in Figure 4b, a 40% decrease in current appears at the Pt/C electrode upon the addition of 2% (w/w) methanol. However, the strong and stable amperometric response from the ORR on the N-graphene electrode remained unchanged after the addition of hydrogen gas, glucose, and methanol (Figure 4b). Such high selectivity of the N-graphene electrode toward the ORR and remarkably good tolerance to crossover effect can be attributed to the much lower ORR potential than that required for oxidation of the fuel molecules. (3,40) To examine the effect of CO on the electrocatalytic activity of the N-graphene electrode, a 10% (v/v) CO in air was introduced into the electrolyte. The N-graphene electrode was insensitive to CO (Figure 4c), whereas the Pt/C electrode was rapidly poisoned under the same conditions. We also performed continuous potential cycling to investigate the stability of the N-graphene electrode toward ORR. As can be seen in Figure 4d, no obvious decrease in current was observed after 200000 continuous cycles between −1.0 and 0 V in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH.\nIn summary, we have developed a facile CVD approach for the large-area synthesis of N-graphene films, which can be readily transferred onto various substrates. The high-quality N-graphene films thus formed were evidenced by AFM, TEM, Raman, XRD, and XPS measurements. The N-graphene film shows superb performance for oxygen reduction reaction associated with alkaline fuel cells. The steady-state catalytic current at the N-graphene electrode was found to be ca. 3 times higher than that at the Pt/C electrode over a large potential range. The long-term stability, tolerance to crossover, and poison effect are also better than Pt/C for oxygen reduction in alkaline electrolyte. It is notable that the N-doped graphene film possesses remarkable electrocatalytic properties for ORR similar to that of nitrogen-containing vertically aligned carbon nanotubes. (3) The ease with which graphene materials and their N-doped derivatives can be produced by various low-cost large-scale methods, including the chemical vapor deposition, chemical reduction of graphite oxide, (14,20) exfoliation of graphite, (21) microwave plasma reaction, (41) and atmospheric pressure graphitization of silicon carbide, (42) suggests considerable room for cost-effective preparation of metal-free efficient graphene-based catalysts for oxygen reduction. Furthermore, this work clearly indicates that the important role of N-doping to ORR demonstrated with nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes and N-graphene can be applied to other carbon materials for the development of various other metal-free efficient ORR catalysts for fuel cell applications, even new catalytic materials for applications beyond fuel cells."
}