Since the discovery of the ﬁrst C-MFEC in 2009, 8 enormous progress has been made and various carbon nanomaterials including carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, and carbon quantum dots, doped with heteroatoms (e.g., N, B, S) have been developed for the ORR, OER, and/or HER electrocatalysis. 2,7,9 Besides, various heteroatom-doped carbon composites, such as graphene quantum dots/graphene nanoribbons and graphene/CNT structures, have also been reported for metal-free electrolysis. 10 For ORR, combined experimental and theoretical studies have revealed that the improved catalytic performance of heteroatom-doped carbons could be attributed to the electron-accepting/donating abilities of the heteroatom(s) to create net positive/negative charge(s) on adjacent carbon atoms to change the chemisorption mode of O 2 onto the C-MFECs, which eﬀectively weakens the O−O bonding and facilitates the ORR process.8,11 

In addition to the intramolecular charge-transfer that imparts ORR electrocatalytic activities to heteroatom-doped carbon nanotubes, graphene, and graphite described above, pure carbon CNTs or graphene, either in an aligned or nonaligned form, adsorbed with certain polyelectrolytes (e.g., PDDA) have also been demonstrated to act as metal-free electrocatalysts for ORR through the intermolecular chargetransfer from the all-carbon CNTs or graphene to the adsorbed PDDA 12a,b or PEDOT. 12c In particular, we demonstrated that the PDDA-adsorbed vertically aligned CNT electrode possesses remarkable electrocatalytic properties for ORR,12b  similar to those of a commercially available Pt/C electrode. These results clearly indicate that the important role of intermolecular charge-transfer to ORR can be applied to carbon nanomaterials in general for the development of various other metal-free eﬃcient ORR catalysts for fuel cell applications, even new catalytic materials for applications beyond fuel cells (e.g., metal−air batteries, electrochemical biosensors). These previous studies prompted us to leverage the strong charge-transfer eﬀects between uncharged C 60 and CNTs for producing stable and eﬃcient multifunctional electrocatalysts largely free from heteroatom-doping and defect, a promising possibility that has not been recognized so far.

Owing to its unique spherical molecular structure, with all sp2 -hybridized carbon atoms, and unparalleled electron aﬃnity, capable of accepting six electrons per C 60 molecule, buckminsterfullerene (C60 ) has been widely studied for biomedical and optoelectronic applications. 13 As such, various C60 -CNT composites, including C60 -encapsulated CNT peapod structures 14 and C60 -grafted CNTs, 15 have been developed for electrochemical sensing and many other applications. However, the possible application of C 60 for electrocatalysis has rarely been discussed in the literature. To our best knowledge, no C60 -based multifunctional electrocatalyst has been reported to date.

In this study, we adsorbed C 60 onto single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) to cause intermolecular charge-transfer with SWCNTs, leading to even better electrocatalytic activities than those of commercial Pt and RuO 2 catalysts for ORR, OER, and HER. We further demonstrated that the resultant high-performance C60 -SWCNT multifunctional electrocatalysts are promising for water-splitting 16 and beyond. 17 As schematically shown in Figure 1a, the newly developed C60 SWCNTs can act as both eﬃcient metal-free ORR/OER/HER trifunctional and OER/HER bifunctional catalysts (vide infra). Therefore, this work has not only opened up new applications for C 60 but also provided a facile, but eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective, approach to metal-free, heteroatom-/defect-free multifunctional ORR/OER/HER catalysts simply by adsorbing C 60 onto SWCNTs.