Electrocatalytic water splitting provides a sustainable strategy to supply clean energy through hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), where an effective catalyst is a necessity.1 In principle, OER is a thermodynamic uphill reaction involving a stepwise four-electron transfer at a high overpotential. Noble metal/metal oxides, such as Pt, RuO2, and IrO2, are still considered as being the most active electrocatalysts. However, the high cost and element scarcity of these noble metals or metal oxides seriously hinder their large-scale application for water splitting. Co-based oxides can act as active OER electrocatalysts with relatively low cost and earth-abundance. Bulk cobalt oxides are normally less active for OER due to their poor conductivity and low surface area. The electrocatalytic activity of cobalt oxide is mainly determined by its surface area and electronic states. Various approaches have been adopted to improve the catalytic activity of cobalt oxides for OER.2 Anchoring Co3O4 nanocrystals on carbon-based supports could significantly enhance their electrocatalytic activity for OER contributed by the small crystalline size and conductive support.3

As discussed above, the electrocatalytic activity of Co3O4 was mainly affected by its surface area and electronic states. The higher surface area of Co3O4 provides more accessible sites for electrochemical reactions. The surface area could be increased through a nanostructure strategy.4 On the other hand, the electronic states, especially the surface electronic states, of Co3O4 could be tuned by doping with a third element,5 facet control,6 or oxygen vacancies.7 Tuning oxygen vacancies of metal oxides could significantly alter their catalytic activity.8 Co3O4 is of mixed valences with the presence of Co2+ and Co3+. The proper control of the ratio of Co2+/Co3+ in the Co3O4 could lead to significant modifications on its electronic and thus catalytic properties.7

Herein, we designed a highly efficient Co3O4-based OER electrocatalyst with oxygen vacancies and high surface area by a one-step plasma-engraving strategy. The pristine Co3O4 nanosheets were deposited on a Ti substrate by the electrodeposition of Co(OH)2 followed by thermal annealing. The pristine Co3O4 nanosheets were subjected to the Ar plasma treatment. It is well known that the Ar plasma is often used for etching and cleaning.9 The Ar plasma treatment on Co3O4 nanosheets could effectively engrave the nanosheet structure to expose more surface sites, as illustrated in Scheme 1. More surprisingly, the plasma-engraved Co3O4 shows the presence of oxygen vacancies on its surface, as characterized by XRD and XPS. The increased surface area and the generated surface oxygen vacancies of Co3O4 by the plasma engraving significantly contributed to the excellent electrocatalytic performance for OER. Compared to the pristine Co3O4 nanosheets, the plasma-engraved Co3O4 nanosheets exhibit a much higher current density of 44.44 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) and a much lower onset potential of 1.45 V. The specific activity of plasma-engraved Co3O4 nanosheets obtained by normalizing the OER current with the BET surface area (0.055 mA cm−2BET at 1.6 V) is 10 times higher than that of pristine Co3O4 nanosheets. It should be pointed out that the Ar plasma treatment is very time-saving with only 120 s to produce highly efficient electrocatalyts, and the similar strategy could be extended to engrave NiO nanosheets with improved electrocatalytic performance for OER as well.

