
The development of new type of quantum dots (QDs) with controllable properties provides opportunities for fabrication and design of new devices with extraordinary properties and functions. Recently, significant advancement on both the experimental and theoretical fronts has been made in the synthesis of zero-dimensional (0D) graphene quantum dots (GQDs) having marvelous properties associated with quantum-confinement and edge effects. (1) As a consequence, tremendous attention has been paid to the development of various chemical methods for the controllable synthesis of GQDs. (1, 2) Recently, we also reported a facile electrochemical approach for the large-scale preparation of functional GQDs (3) with unexpected green luminescence and electron-accepting properties.
Doping carbon nanomaterials with heteroatoms can effectively tune their intrinsic properties, including electronic characteristics, surface and local chemical features. (4, 5) The N atom, having a comparable atomic size and five valence electrons for bonding with carbon atoms, has been widely used for chemical doping of carbon nanomaterials. For instance, N-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs) showed highly effective electrocatalytic activities for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). (5, 6) Similarly, doping of graphene with substituent N heteroatoms could effectively modulate the band gap of graphene to introduce new properties for device applications. (4b, 7) Along with various methods developed for the preparation of N-doped graphene materials, (4a, 8-13) we have used chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to create N-doped few-layer graphene sheets, which showed superior electrocatalytic activity similar to that of N-doped CNTs. (14)
In view of the remarkable quantum-confinement and edge effects of 0D GQDs, doping GQDs with chemically bonded N atoms could drastically alter their electronic characteristics and offer more active sites, thus producing new phenomena and unexpected properties. As far as we are aware, however, no attempt has been made to synthesize N-doped GQDs (N-GQDs), and hence, their unique optoelectronic properties are almost completely unknown. In line with the intensive research on GQDs and N-doped carbon nanomaterials, we for the first time report here an electrochemical approach for the facile preparation of N-GQDs. Unlike their green-luminescent N-free counterparts of similar size (2–5 nm), (3) the N-GQDs with a N/C atomic ratio of ca. 4.3% emit a distinct blue luminescence. In addition, N-GQDs supported by 2D graphene sheets can be used as a new class of metal-free electrocatalysts for the ORR comparable to those of commercial Pt/C electrodes, N-doped CNTs, and N-doped graphene sheets.
To prepare N-GQDs with a N-enriched circumstance, we modified our previously reported electrochemical approach for preparing N-free GQDs (3) by using N-containing tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) in acetontrile as the electrolyte to introduce N atoms into the resultant GQDs in situ. The N-GQDs were continuously produced by cyclic voltammogram (CV) scanning over a potential window of ±3.0 V [Figure S1 in the Supporting Information (SI)]. The as-produced N-GQDs were dissolved in the electrolyte solution while increasing the number of scan cycles, and the solution color changed from colorless to yellow (Figure S2).
