Platinum (Pt) nanoparticles have long been regarded as the best catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells, though the Pt-based electrode still suffers from its susceptibility to time-dependent drift and CO deactivation. (1−3) Furthermore, the high cost of the Pt catalysts, together with the limited reserves of Pt in nature, has been shown to be the major “showstopper” to mass market fuel cells for commercial applications. That is why the large-scale practical application of fuel cells has not been realized, though alkaline fuel cells with platinum as an ORR electrocatalyst were developed for the Apollo lunar mission in the 1960s. (4) Along with recent intensive research efforts in reducing or replacing Pt-based electrodes in fuel cells, (3,5−11) we have found that vertically aligned nitrogen-containing carbon nanotubes (VA-NCNTs) produced by pyrolysis of iron(II) phthalocyanine (a metal heterocyclic molecule containing nitrogen), (12) in either the presence or absence of additional NH3 vapor, (3) could act as effective metal-free ORR electrocatalysts. The metal-free VA-NCNTs were shown to catalyze a four-electron ORR process free from CO “poisoning” with a 3-time higher electrocatalytic activity, smaller crossover effect, and better long-term operation stability than that of commercially available Pt-based electrodes (C2−20, 20% platinumonVulcanXC-72R; E-TEK) in alkaline electrolytes. (3) On the basis of the experimental observations and quantum mechanics calculations, we attributed the improved catalytic performance to the electron-accepting ability of the nitrogen atoms, which creates a net positive charge on adjacent carbon atoms in the nanotube carbon plane of VA-NCNTs to readily attract electrons from the anode for facilitating the ORR. (3) Uncovering this new ORR mechanism in nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube electrodes is significant as the same principle could be applied to the development of various other metal-free efficient ORR catalysts for fuel cell applications.
The recent discovery of graphene has opened up a new era of 2-dimensional (2D) fundamental science and potential technology. (13−15) As mother of all graphitic forms, graphene is a building block for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities, such as 0D buckyballs, 1D nanotubes, and 3D graphite. Having many similarities to carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in structure and property, including its high aspect ratio (the ratio of lateral size to thickness), large surface, rich electronic states, and good mechanical properties, graphene is an attractive candidate for potential uses in many areas where the CNTs have been exploited. Superior to CNTs, the one atomic-thick graphene sheets with a 2D planar geometry will further facilitate electron transport, (16) and hence the more effective electrode materials.
Although CNTs and their N-doped counterparts have been synthesized and studied for some years, the large-scale preparation of graphene sheets by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is only the recent development. (17,18) More recently, attempts have been made to introduce heteroatoms (e.g., nitrogen) into graphene sheets for modulation of their electronic properties. (19) As far as we are aware, however, the possibility for nitrogen-containing graphene sheets (N-graphene, we designate the N-free graphene as C-graphene for convenience) to be used as catalysts for the ORR process in fuel cells has not been exploited. In the present study, we investigated the CVD-deposited N-graphene sheets for ORR at the cathode in alkaline fuel cells. As we shall see later, the N-graphene showed a much better electrocatalytic activity, long-term operation stability, and tolerance to crossover and poison effects than the commercially available platinum-based electrodes (C2−20, 20% platinumonVulcanXC-72R; E-TEK) for oxygen reduction.
In this study, we used a modified CVD process (17) for the synthesis of N-graphene films. Briefly, a thin layer of nickel (∼300 nm) was deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate by sputter coating. The Ni-coated SiO2/Si wafer was then heated up to 1000 °C within a quartz tube furnace under a high purity argon atmosphere. Thereafter, a nitrogen-containing reaction gas mixture (NH3:CH4:H2:Ar = 10:50:65:200 standard cubic centimeters per minute) was introduced into the quartz tube and kept flowing for 5 min, followed by purging with a flow of NH3 and Ar only for another 5 min. The sample was then rapidly moved out from the furnace center (1000 °C) under Ar protection. The resultant N-graphene film can be readily etched off from the substrate by dissolving the residual Ni catalyst layer in an aqueous solution of HCl, (17,18) allowing the free-standing N-graphene sheets to be transferred onto substrates suitable for subsequent investigation.