{
  "0": "Introduction\nFuel cells have inspired tremendous attention because they can convert chemical energy directly into electricity with high energy conversion efficiencies and do not emit harmful gases.1 However, to move towards a genuinely practicable application, fuel cells still suffer from insufficient durability performance, arising mainly from cathode catalyst oxidation, catalyst migration, and the loss of electrode activity. Almost all research and development focuses on improving the cathode catalysts and electrodes. The cathode oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is six or more times slower than that of the anode hydrogen oxidation reaction, thus limiting its performance.2 Most fuel cells used today are based on platinum-based catalysts, with most active for ORR and the four-electron pathway at low overpotentials. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to designing platinum-based catalysts by using electronic-, morphologies-, and interface effects to reduce the Pt content and enhance ORR catalysis activity.3 However, platinum-based and other noble metal catalysts still suffer from high cost, scarcity in nature, CO poisoning, the crossover effect, and rather poor durability under fuel cell conditions.4 Therefore, numerous studies have concentrated on replacing platinum-based catalysts with non-precious metal catalysts.5 Non-precious metal catalysts are ideal candidates because of their low price, high catalytic activity, and strong stability. Transition-metal-based catalysts such as Co, Fe, Mn, and Ni6have drawn extensive attention because of their low cost and have recently shown excellent ORR activity improvements. In addition, transition metals can make the dissociated oxygen immobilized because of their tendency to form stable oxides, which are good at enhancing ORR catalysis activity and the four-electron pathway process.7 The most promising non-precious catalysts are carbon-supported transition-metal materials (MN/C).8 Nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterials have been widely employed to support non-precious metals such as carbon nanotubes and graphene,9 not only to promote electron transfer but also to provide more active sites for the ORR. NBCNT are ideal carbon substrates for ORR catalysts because of their original structure and unique properties.4 Moreover, they can supply a sufficient number of reacting sites that are believed to involve surface nitrogen coordinated with metals.10\nFor the most part, NBCNT are synthesized by chemical vapor deposition (CVD),11 hard-template method,12 or laser vaporization,13 and so on. Numerous innovative ORR catalysts have been developed because of the conductivity, large specific surface, and high thermal stability of NBCNT. For instance, the group of Alexander demonstrated carbon nanotubes composed of individual nanocups stacked together by performing the CVD method; these carbon nanotubes demonstrated a similar catalytic ability in ORR as that of Pt-CNTs.14 Chen and co-workers reported an advanced multifunctional electrocatalyst on the basis of N-doped graphene/CNT complexes by pyrolysis of FeCl3 and cyanamide, whose CNTs exhibit bamboo-like structure.15 The research group of Yang synthesized core-shell Co@Co3O4 embedded in the bamboo-like N-doped carbon tubes by a two-step method.16 However, problems plaguing such NBCNT hybrids catalysts still exist, including microstructural non-homogeneity, which influenced their catalyst properties. Although these catalysts exhibit excellent ORR performance in durability and four-electron path, their ORR catalytic activity is poorer than commercial Pt/C. In reality, for bamboo-like nanotube and other materials prepared by pyrolysis, structure control is always a difficult task;17 the CNTs of which have large and unordered diameters and non-uniform morphologies. Although the CVD method can be used to easily change the CNT diameter by altering the size of the catalyst particles and control lengths by changing the gas flow rate,18 it is rather complicated and expensive and generally needs to use substrates for nanotubes growth, which limits its large-scale commercialization production.19 In addition, the N sources for NBCNT, such as cyanamide20 and pyridine,9 are generally corrosive, toxic, and expensive. In fact, there is still no facile and large-scale approach to synthesize uniform NBCNT as low-cost efficient ORR catalysts.\nHere, we present a facile, low-cost, and large-scale method to synthesize uniform Co-NBCNT by annealing a powder mixture of melamine and cobalt acetate. We choose melamine as N-containing carbon precursor, which is cheap and non-toxic, and favorable for large-scale production.6b The obtained Co-NBCNT with uniform diameters and lengths can serve as effective and",
  "1": "NT as low-cost efficient ORR catalysts.\nHere, we present a facile, low-cost, and large-scale method to synthesize uniform Co-NBCNT by annealing a powder mixture of melamine and cobalt acetate. We choose melamine as N-containing carbon precursor, which is cheap and non-toxic, and favorable for large-scale production.6b The obtained Co-NBCNT with uniform diameters and lengths can serve as effective and durable catalysts for ORR in alkaline solutions, and performs better in ORR than commercial Pt/C (20 wt %). The onset potential of ORR on Co-NBCNT reaches −0.0067 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which is much more positive than that of commercial Pt/C (−0.019 V). The diffusion-limiting current of Co-NBCNT (5.48 mA cm−2) is superior to that of Pt/C (4.91 mA cm−2). Co-NBCNT also exhibits better durability and methanol tolerance than the Pt/C catalyst in 0.1 M KOH. Moreover, the carbon nanotube also exhibits good ORR activity in acidic media, comparable to commercial Pt/C with diffusion-limiting current close to that of Pt/C and the four-electron pathway.\nResults and Discussion\nThe experimental procedures are illustrated schematically in Scheme 1. Co-NBCNT was just obtained by annealing inexpensive starting materials, which is a powder mixture of [Co(OAc)2] and melamine under N2 atmosphere. The mixture powders was placed on a quartz boat and heated to 600 °C and then the temperature was further raised to 800 °C in N2 atmosphere (hereafter designated as Co-600-800). The obtained material is treated with 0.5 M H2SO4 to remove cobalt species around nanotubes, which have poor conductivities. Because Co species are soluble in acid, Co nanoparticles protected by carbon layers can survive in the leaching process. The surviving Co nanoparticles are entrapped in the nanotube, which are surrounded by a carbon multishell. Outer protective graphitic layers stabilize the metal nanoparticles in hot acids. This method can scaled up in one-pot to synthesize 10 g Co-NBCNTs. Moreover, we found that the unique nanostructure of the carbon nanotube is a possible reason for outstanding ORR activity.\nScheme 1\nOpen in figure viewer\nPowerPoint\nIllustration of the synthesis of the NBCNT.\nFigure 1 a, b show scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of nanotubes, in which we can see large amounts of typical bamboo-like nanotubes with lengths of more than several micrometers. From TEM (Figure 1 c, d) we can observe that the diameters of the nanotubes are in the range of 60–100 nm, whereas the wall thickness is only about 5 nm. We can easily observe transparent CNTs and the “knots” of NBCNT in TEM image owing to the concave bamboo-like joints. Dark dots at the tip of the tubes encapsulated in graphitic carbon shells can be regarded as Co nanoparticles, which are in accordance with the HRTEM images (Figure 1 e). High-resolution TEM images (Figure 1 e, f and the Supporting Information, Figure S1) indicated that the Co nanoparticles located at the tip of CNTs are coated by several graphitic carbon layers even inside the nanotube. Although almost all tips of nanotubes are encapsulating Co nanoparticles, some Co nanoparticles are still embedded in the middle of nanotubes (Figure 1 c). Most of the nanoparticles are tightly encapsulated by multiple layers of concentric carbon shells due to Co-catalyzed graphitization. Moreover, graphitic nanosheets insert into NBCNT, and the random graphitic nanosheet structure forms the compartments of the bamboo-like joints structure, which relates to structural defects induced by nitrogen doping at the joint and the CNT walls.\nFigure 1\nOpen in figure viewer\nPowerPoint\na, b) SEM, c, d) TEM, and e, f) HRTEM images of CO-600-800.\nThe chemical composition and crystalline structure of the obtained carbon nanotube was further investigated by applying various techniques, such as powder X-",
  "2": " which relates to structural defects induced by nitrogen doping at the joint and the CNT walls.\nFigure 1\nOpen in figure viewer\nPowerPoint\na, b) SEM, c, d) TEM, and e, f) HRTEM images of CO-600-800.\nThe chemical composition and crystalline structure of the obtained carbon nanotube was further investigated by applying various techniques, such as powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), element mapping, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. The Co-600-800 exposes a series of XRD peaks that correspond to the typical X-ray reflections of graphite and metallic cobalt. Figure 2 a reveals a broad peak at about 26.5 of the XRD pattern, which corresponds to the (002) planes of the graphitic carbon, whereas the other XRD diffraction peaks correspond to metal Co (PDF 15-0806). Element mapping (the Supporting Information, Figure S2) suggests the presence of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and cobalt elements. The element content is also determined by XPS (Figure 2 b), which showed similar results to those determined by X-ray spectroscopy analysis (EDX) (the Supporting Information, Figure S3). As shown in Figure 2 b, the XPS spectrum reveals the atomic percentages of C (95.92 %), O (1.92 %), N (1.91 %), and Co (0.26 %), confirming that N and Co have been successfully doped into the carbon nanotubes. The N and Co contents were similar in different carbonization temperature from 700–1000 °C (the Supporting Information, Table S1). The low nitrogen and Co content perhaps results because Co nanoparticles are tightly encapsulated by multiple carbon layers in the catalysts. As shown in Figure 2 c, the N 1s XPS spectrum of Co-600-800 shows that the sample contains two types of nitrogen species, which can be attributed to pyridinic and quaternary nitrogen atoms. These two types of nitrogen species increase the defect density to provide more catalytic active sites, which are critical to promote ORR catalysis activity.21 The sample was obtained as magnetic powders (the Supporting Information, Figure S4), also suggesting the presence of Co. To determine the amount of cobalt in Co-600-800, TGA was performed in air with the temperature elevated from 28 to 900 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. As shown in Figure 2 b, the amount of Co is calculated to be 10.71 %. Figure 2 e shows the nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherm of obtained samples. Co-600-800 shows a large Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area (94.17 m2 g−1). Other carbonization temperature samples were also investigated that showed large BET surface area as shown in Figure S5 (the Supporting Information). As shown in Figure 2 f, the micro-Raman spectrum of Co-600-800 exhibited the characteristic D and G bands of CNTs. The D and G bands in the Raman spectrum are positioned at 1329 and 1573 cm−1, respectively. The intensity ratio between D and G bands (ID/IG) is typically used as a method to measure defect density in carbon materials. As for Co-600-800, ID/IG is found to be 0.96. This suggests the characteristic of graphite with a significant defective structure of CNTs, coupling to smaller crystallites and high defect density. Because the pyrolysis temperature plays an essential role in the formation of active sites for carbon substrate catalysts,22 the activity of Co-NBCNT was examined for the samples obtained at 700–1000 °C. The ID/IG ratio of the materials changes from 0.93 to 0.58 (the Supporting Information, Figure S6) as the pyrolysis temperature is changed from 700 to 1000 °C. The pyridinic N atoms content doped into the carbon structure (the Supporting Information, Figure S7) decreases as the pyrolysis temperature increases. The low pyridinic N causes a decrease in the ID/IG ratio because pyridinic N is always located at edges and at defects.\nFigure",
  "3": " 0.58 (the Supporting Information, Figure S6) as the pyrolysis temperature is changed from 700 to 1000 °C. The pyridinic N atoms content doped into the carbon structure (the Supporting Information, Figure S7) decreases as the pyrolysis temperature increases. The low pyridinic N causes a decrease in the ID/IG ratio because pyridinic N is always located at edges and at defects.\nFigure 2\nOpen in figure viewer\nPowerPoint\na) XRD patterns; b) XPS full spectrum; c) high-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum; d) TGA; e) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm curve; f) Raman spectrum of Co-600-800.\nWe conducted control synthetic experiments and TEM analyses to illustrate the growth of NBCNT and try to control the uniform morphologies. At a low fraction of the Co source, the resulting Co nanoparticles are small (the Supporting Information, Figure S8 a), resulting in the growth of concave CNTs with a short length and relatively small diameter. With increasing amounts of Co2+, the CNTs get larger and Co nanoparticles encapsulated by graphitic carbon shells around nanotubes can be observed (the Supporting Information, Figure S8 b). Some CNTs do not have well-defined bamboo-like structures; some cobalt species can be observed not part of the CNTs (the Supporting Information, Figure S8), which indicates that nucleation of Co species could be the first step of the CNT growth.23 There were no CNTs, rather a slice porous carbon sheet in the sample under pyrolysis at 600 °C (the Supporting Information, Figure S9 a). In addition, the uniform NBCNT was obtained upon raising the temperature beyond 700 °C, suggesting the formation process of CNTs occurs above 600 °C. If we heated to 400 °C and then further raised to 800 °C, we obtained Co-NBCNT. The Co nanoparticles are relatively large, thus resulting in the growth of CNTs with uneven and larger diameters (the Supporting Information, Figure S9 b). However, if we heated at 800 °C to obtain the sample (hereafter designated as Co-800), most CNTs were relatively short, concave, and hollow, with no bamboo-like structures but still possessed similar morphologies primarily consisting of carbon nanotubes with Co nanoparticles encapsulated at the tips (the Supporting Information, Figure S10). During the formation process, the Co2+ ions were reduced to Co nanoparticles by gases released from the decomposition of melamine, while the reduced Co nanoparticles catalyze graphitization and the growth of nanotubes by adsorbing and depositing the gas from the melamine as the catalysts.15 From the HRTEM images, we can explicitly observe that the Co-based nanoparticles were tightly encapsulated by multiple layers carbon shells with a uniform size the same as the diameters of CNTs.\nElectrochemical measurements\nRotating disk electrode (RDE) and rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) measurements were tested to investigate the ORR activities of Co-NBCNT. For comparison, commercial Pt/C (20 wt %) was also measured in O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH. The ORR electrocatalytic activity was also measured through conventional three-electrode cyclic voltammetry (CV) and RDE in O2 saturated 0.1 m KOH aqueous solutions. The results in the alkaline media (0.1 M KOH) are shown in Figure 3 a, b, respectively. Co-600-800 displayed a well-defined cathodic ORR peak, a reduction peak potential centered at −0.133 V with a high reaction current of −1.42 mA cm−2; both values were much superior to those of commercial Pt/C (−0.19 V, −0.93 mA cm−2) catalysts. Remarkably, the polarization curve of Co-600-800 also displayed a diffusion-limiting current beyond that of Pt/C (5.48 vs. 4.91 mA cm−2), and even a much more positive onset potential (−0.0067 V) than those of Pt/C (−0.019 V). Its 34",
  "4": ".19 V, −0.93 mA cm−2) catalysts. Remarkably, the polarization curve of Co-600-800 also displayed a diffusion-limiting current beyond that of Pt/C (5.48 vs. 4.91 mA cm−2), and even a much more positive onset potential (−0.0067 V) than those of Pt/C (−0.019 V). Its 34 mV more positive half-wave potential (E1/2) compared to that of Pt/C indicates that the ORR catalytic activity of Co-600-800 is superior to that of commercial Pt/C. Up to now, a number of non-precious metal and metal-free electrocatalysts for ORR process have already been investigated. However, most of the catalysts still demonstrate weaker catalysis activity than that of commercial 20 % Pt/C in alkaline media.24, 25 Figure 3 c reveals the RRDE measurements in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 to investigate ORR activities in an acidic media. According to the reported literature, most of the non-precious metal catalysts and metal-free catalysts do not exhibit obvious activity of ORR in acidic media.26 However, Co-600-800 still shows good ORR catalytic ability in acidic media, comparable to that of commercial Pt/C with a diffusion-limiting current close to that of Pt/C. This is probably because the protective graphitic layer encasing is greatly resistant to acid.\nFigure 3\nOpen in figure viewer\nPowerPoint\na) CV curves of Co-600-800 and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1; b) Polarization curves for Co-600-800 and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH with RDE rotation rate of 1600 rpm; c) Linear scan voltammograms of NBCNT in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 at a rotating rate of 1600 rpm; d) Linear scan voltammograms of NBCNT prepared at different conditions.\nFigure 3 d indicates the influence of carbonization temperature, unique bamboo-like joints, and the presence of Co nanoparticles on the ORR activities of as-produced Co-NBCNT catalysts. Because the pyrolysis temperature plays a vital part in providing active sites for carbon substrate catalysts, the activity of Co-NBCNT was investigated for the Co-NBCNT pyrolysis at 700–1000 °C. It could be inferred from Figure 3 d that a carbonization temperature of 800 °C was ideal for the optimum ORR performance. Notably, the onset potential of Co-600-800 catalysts is more positive than that of the other carbonization temperatures. The Co-600-800 also displayed the most positive half-wave potential (E1/2) and the highest diffusion-limiting current density compared with those of its counterparts. The element content in the Co-NBCNT pyrolysis from 700 to 1000 °C, as determined by XPS (the Supporting Information, Figure S6 and Table S1), are nearly the same. However, the obtained materials exhibited different catalytic activity after they underwent pyrolysis at different carbonization temperatures, although they still contained similar morphology and structure, as determined by XRD and TEM images (the Supporting Information, Figures S11 and S12). Although the different pyrolysis temperatures resulted in a different BET surface area (the Supporting Information, Figure S5), ORR catalytic activity seems largely unrelated to the surface area between the different carbonization temperature samples. In addition, the trend in ORR catalytic activity seems to correlate well with defect density in the materials.22 This can be proved from the changes in the ID/IG ratio of the NBCNT from 0.93 to 0.58 as the pyrolysis temperature is changed from 700 to 1000 °C. This result is also in agreement with the fact that ORR activity of Co-600-700 is close to that of Co-600-800, which has a similar ID/IG ratio. Regardless of the fact that structure is similar to that of other carbonization temperatures, the Co-600-800 catalyst showed most uniform morphologies, which is probably in favor of improving the electrical conductivity. Moreover, in association with an XPS analysis (the Supporting Information,",
  "5": " 1000 °C. This result is also in agreement with the fact that ORR activity of Co-600-700 is close to that of Co-600-800, which has a similar ID/IG ratio. Regardless of the fact that structure is similar to that of other carbonization temperatures, the Co-600-800 catalyst showed most uniform morphologies, which is probably in favor of improving the electrical conductivity. Moreover, in association with an XPS analysis (the Supporting Information, Figure S7), the amount of the pyridinic N and pyrrolic N atoms could also be assumed to be responsible for the catalyst activity.21\nThe unique bamboo-like joints structure also had a significant influence on the ORR catalytic property of the Co-600-800. The result can be concluded by the poor catalytic activity of Co-800, which does not have a clear bamboo-like joint structure with almost the same carbon-encapsulated Co nanoparticles at the tip of multi-walled CNTs. The bamboo-like joints are actually graphitic nanosheets entrapped in the inner of CNTs, resulting in the concave CNTs walls. It was found that the formation of the NBCNT structure led to increased graphite sheets dispersion in CNTs.27 The wrinkled surface and inner graphitic nanosheets of CNTs can provide more active reaction sites for the ORR catalyst process.\nBesides, we found that Co nanoparticles encapsulated in the nanotubes also represent crucial roles for high ORR activity. The Co nanoparticles are chemically stable in 0.5 M H2SO4 acids because the nanoparticles are encapsulated by multiple carbon layers. Thus, we used hot concentrated HNO3 aqueous solution to remove the Co nanoparticles embedded in CNTs (denote as Co-leaching). Co nanoparticles were totally removed by the hot concentrated acid leaching process, as shown in Figure S13 (the Supporting Information). Consequently, after removal of the Co nanoparticles, the ORR catalysis activity of the catalyst decreases. Despite the fact that the encapsulated Co nanoparticles were not contact with the electrolyte solution directly, they still play a vital role in the ORR catalysis process. A synergetic interaction exists between the Co nanoparticles and protective graphitic layers in the ORR catalysis process. In other words, the encapsulated Co nanoparticles activate the surrounding graphitic layers, making the outer surface of the graphitic layer more active towards the ORR catalysis process.10 As a result, the ORR catalytic process can be achieved on the outside surface of the CNTs. On the basis of on the above results, the Co-600-800 outstanding catalytic performance for ORR could be attributed to the pyridinic N atoms dopants related structural defect density, uniform bamboo-like structure, and synergetic interaction between the Co nanoparticles and protective graphitic layers.\nThe ORR pathways can be determined by rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) and rotating disk electrode (RDE) measurements. Figure 4 a shows the RDE polarization curves for the ORR on Co-600-800 electrode at a rotation speed from 200 to 2500 rpm. The Koutecky–Levich (K–L) plots are drawn from the RDE polarization curves with various rotation speeds as Figure 4 b reveals. As with the corresponding K–L plots, we can clearly observe that the data displayed good linearity and the slopes of their best linear fit lines were used to determine the number of electrons transferred (n) based on the Koutecky–Levich Equation [Eq. (1)] (see the Experimental Section). The number of electrons transferred (n) was calculated to be 3.8–4.0 at potentials ranging from −0.3 to −0.6 V. Reducing O2 through the four-electron pathway is desirable to acquire maximum energy capacity. RRDE curves of Co-600-800 (the Supporting Information, Figure S14) were also measured to determine the electron transfer number and peroxide species. The percentage of peroxide species and the electron transfer number (n) are can be directly calculated from the disk currents (ID) and the ring currents (IR) according to Equations (3) and (4) (see the Experimental Section) defined at electrochemical measurements. The results are shown in Figure 4(c); the peroxide species yield in alkaline solution is about 10 % in the measured potential range from 0.2 to −1 V and n is average at 3.84. The H2O2 yield of Co-600-800",
  "6": " disk currents (ID) and the ring currents (IR) according to Equations (3) and (4) (see the Experimental Section) defined at electrochemical measurements. The results are shown in Figure 4(c); the peroxide species yield in alkaline solution is about 10 % in the measured potential range from 0.2 to −1 V and n is average at 3.84. The H2O2 yield of Co-600-800 is below 2 % and n is almost constant at 4 in acidic solution, also investigated over the whole potential range (the Supporting Information, Figure S15). Therefore, the ORR process of the Co-600-800 catalyst is mainly through the four-electron pathway, both in alkaline solution and acidic solution. Figure 4 d shows the Tafel plots of Co-600-800 and commercial Pt/C. The kinetic currents derived from Figure 3 c shows a Tafel slope of about 84.1 mV per decade at low overpotentials in 0.1 M KOH, which is close to 77 mV per decade for the Pt/C catalyst. The Co-600-800 shows similar kinetic processes to Pt/C in alkaline solution; the transfer of the first electron is probably the rate-determining step of the ORR for the Co-NBCNT catalysts.16 In addition, the ideal catalyst for ORR should also display satisfactory tolerance to the fuel molecule across the membrane from the anode. To investigate the possible poisoning effects for the catalytic performance, we have measured the catalytic selectivity of the catalysts against the electro-oxidation of the commonly used methanol molecules. The catalyst was exposed to fuel molecules for testing a possible crossover effect. RDE polarization curves were carried out in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH for the Pt/C (Figure 5 a) and Co-600-800 (Figure 5 b) with and without 0.5 M methanol. As compared with Pt/C, Co-600-800 expresses little activity loss, suggesting prominent tolerance to the methanol poisoning effects. Furthermore, electrocatalyst durability is considered one of the most significant points. To assess the durability of the electrocatalyst, the current–time (I/t) chronoamperometric response of the Co-600-800 and Pt/C electrodes were performed at −0.80 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a 1200 rpm rotation rate as shown in Figure 5 c. After 10 000 seconds, the commercial Pt/C exhibited a 17.1 % activity loss in current density, whereas the Co-600-800 displayed a 9.6 % loss of current density. Therefore, Co-600-800 has a better durability than that of commercial Pt/C. In addition, after 10 000 continuous cycles, the half-wave potential E1/2 showed a little negative shift of only about 11 mV, validating the Co-600-800 high durability as indicated in Figure 5 d. For the commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts, such cycles may cause loss of catalytic activity owing to dissolution of Pt surface atoms and agglomeration of Pt particles through oxidation/reduction processes.3a In contrast, TEM images (the Supporting Information, Figure S16) disclose that the bamboo-like morphology was preserved while activity loss was negligible after 10 000 potential cycles. The enhanced durability is attributed to Co nanoparticles encased in protective graphitic layers, which diminishes the probability of dissolution of the catalyst.\nFigure 4\nOpen in figure viewer\nPowerPoint\na) RDE polarization curves of Co-600-800 at different rotation speeds in O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH; b) K–L plots at different potentials for Co-600-800; c) Electron transfer number and peroxide yield of the Co-600-800 derived from the RRDE data in O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH; d) Tafel plots determined from the RRDE measurements of the Pt/C, Co-600-800 in 1600 rmp.\nFigure 5\nOpen in figure viewer\nPowerPoint\nRDE polarization curves of a) Pt/C and b) Co-600-800 in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with or",
  "7": " data in O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH; d) Tafel plots determined from the RRDE measurements of the Pt/C, Co-600-800 in 1600 rmp.\nFigure 5\nOpen in figure viewer\nPowerPoint\nRDE polarization curves of a) Pt/C and b) Co-600-800 in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with or without 0.5 M methanol; c) Chronoamperometric response of Co-600-800 and Pt/C at constant −0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a rotation rate of 1200 rpm; d) RDE polarization curves of Co-600-800 before and after 10 000 cycles in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Potential cycling was carried out between −0.6 and 0.2 V versus Ag/AgCl at 50 mV s−1.\nOn the basis of the above characterization analysis coupled with the recent studies on non-precious catalysts for ORR catalytic process, the following reasons can probably account for the outstanding ORR activity, the four-electron pathway, and higher stability of Co-600-800. First, the nitrogen atoms doped within the carbon nanotubes play an important role in the ORR process. N dopant-related high structural defect density and the synergistic catalytic effects between the N dopants and carbon-coated Co nanoparticles can be proposed to account for Co-NBCNT enhancing catalytic activity towards ORR process. Second, the unique bamboo-like joints facilitate an increase in the structural defect density and afford abundant catalytic reacting sites on the surface. Moreover, uniform morphologies and homogeneity structure are also in favor of promoting the electrical transfer to raise ORR catalysis activity. Last but not least, the synergetic interaction between the Co nanoparticles and protective graphitic layers in ORR catalysis process. Co nanoparticles activate the surrounding graphitic layers, making the outer surface of the carbon layer active in the ORR catalysis process.\nConclusion\nWe have developed a facile and low-cost production method to synthesize uniform NBCNT with Co nanoparticles encapsulated at the tips. The catalysts was prepared by using inexpensive melamine and cobalt acetate as precursors through a simple thermal treatment, which is amenable to large-scale production. The Co-NBCNT catalyst exhibited excellent ORR activity and stability in alkaline media, better than that of commercial Pt/C regarding reaction current density and onset potential. It also shows higher tolerance for methanol molecules and higher cycle stability performance than the highly efficient Pt/C catalyst. Moreover, the Co-NBCNT catalyst still reveals chemically stable and good ORR catalytic ability in acidic media with a current density close to Pt/C, because the protective graphitic layers offer resistance to acid. The outstanding ORR performance of Co-NBCNT catalyst corresponds to its uniform morphologies, unique bamboo-like structure, nitrogen-doped related structural defect density, and the synergetic interaction between Co nanoparticles and graphitic layers. Thus, the findings of this synthetic approach, the synthesized catalyst of the unique structure, and the proposed mechanism will open a new avenue for the development of low-cost, large-scale, and high-performance catalysts to replace noble Pt-based catalysts for energy conversion applications.\nExperimental Section\nPreparation of Co nanoparticles encapsulated at NBCNT\nIn a typical synthesis, melamine (0.024 mol) and cobalt acetate (0.0024 mol) were dissolved in amount of methanol and continually stirred for 1 h. Next, the homogeneous mixture was stirred at 50 °C until methanol was fully evaporated. The homogeneous mixture was placed on a quartz boat and heated to 600 °C at a ramp of 2 °C min−1 in a tube furnace for 3 h in N2 atmosphere. The temperature in the tube furnace was further raised to 800 °C at a ramp of 3 °C min−1 and kept at 800 °C for 2 h in N2 atmosphere. The color of the powdered material changed from pink to black. The sample was then treated with 0.5 M H2SO4 for 24 h. The as-obtained sample was centrifuged, and the powdered material was washed three times with distilled water and dried under 60 °C. For",
  "8": "°C at a ramp of 3 °C min−1 and kept at 800 °C for 2 h in N2 atmosphere. The color of the powdered material changed from pink to black. The sample was then treated with 0.5 M H2SO4 for 24 h. The as-obtained sample was centrifuged, and the powdered material was washed three times with distilled water and dried under 60 °C. For comparative studies, and to obtain some insights into the structure-electrocatalytic activity relationships of the Co-NBCNT, other samples were first heated to 600 °C at a ramp of 2 °C min−1 in a tube furnace for 3 h by further heating in N2 atmosphere at 700, 900, and 1000 for 2 h at a ramp of 3 °C min−1. Co-800 straight raised temperature to 800 °C at a ramp of 2 °C min−1 to compare the structure effects on ORR activity. Co-leaching was prepared by treated Co-600-800 with 8 M HNO3 at 100 °C overnight to remove Co nanoparticles encapsulated in the CNTs, and washed with deionized water and then dried at 80 °C.\nCharacterization\nScanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out with a field emission scanning electron microanalyzer (Hitachi-SU-8010). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were obtained by a Hitachi-7700 working at 100 KV. High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) with an EDX analytical system characterizations were conducted by a FEI Tecnai G2 F20 S-Twin high-resolution transmission electron microscope working at 200 kV. The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray powder diffractometer with CuKα radiation (λ=1.5418 Å). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) experiments were performed on a ULVAC PHI Quantera microprobe and the C1 s peak at 284.6 eV as an internal standard. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed with TA INSTRUMENTS Q5000IR. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of the samples were measured by using a Quantachrome IQ2 system. The Raman spectra were obtained with a Horiba Raman system model HR-800 spectrometer with a 20 mW air-cooled argon ion laser (514.5 nm) as the excitation source.\nElectrochemical measurements\nThe electrochemical measurements were carried out a computer-controlled electrochemical analyzer workstation (CHI 760 CH Instruments) with the conventional three-electrode system at room temperature. A glassy carbon (GC) disk with a diameter of 6.0 mm served as the substrate for the working electrode. Glassy carbon electrode was first polished using aluminum oxide (Al2O3, 0.3 μm) powder followed by rinsing thoroughly with distilled water. After successive sonication in deionized water and ethanol, the electrode was rinsed with distilled water and dried at room temperature. Electrode materials (5 mg) were dispersed in a mixture of aqueous Nafion (0.1 mL) (5 wt %) and isopropanol (0.9 mL). A suspension was achieved under ultrasonic agitation for a few minutes. Then, 5 μL of the mixture was dropped onto the treated electrodes and dried under room temperature. Electrochemical measurements were performed on a computer-controlled electrochemical analyzer. In alkaline conditions, saturated Ag/AgCl were used as the reference electrodes, and a platinum wire as counter electrodes. Before the measurements were performed, all the electrodes were activated by potential cycling in from −0.2 to 0.6 V for 30 cycles at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The RDE measurements were carried out in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with scanned at a rate of 10 mV s−1 Koutecky–Levich plots were calculated at various electrode potentials. The slopes of their best linear fit lines were used to reckon electrons transferred number (n) by the Koutecky–Levich Equation (1) as follows\n(1)\n(2)\nin which j is the",
  "9": " were carried out in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with scanned at a rate of 10 mV s−1 Koutecky–Levich plots were calculated at various electrode potentials. The slopes of their best linear fit lines were used to reckon electrons transferred number (n) by the Koutecky–Levich Equation (1) as follows\n(1)\n(2)\nin which j is the measured current, jk is the kinetic-limiting current and ω is the electrode rotation rate. The theoretical value of the Koutecky–Levich slope (B) is evaluated from Equation (2), in which n is the number of transferred electrons in the ORR process, F is the Faradaic constant (96 485 C mol−1), C is the bulk concentration of O2 (1.2×10−6 mol cm−3), ν is the kinematic viscosity of the electrolyte 0.01 cm2 s−1, and D is the O2 diffusion coefficient in 0.1 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4 (1.9×10−5 cm2 s−1). In acidic media, the oxygen reduction tests were carried out in O2-saturated 0.5 M solution at room temperature\nRotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) measurement and the catalyst inks and electrodes were prepared by the same method as the RDE to determine the four-electron selectivity. The four-electron selectivity was assessed based on the H2O2 yield and electron transfer number (n). The H2O2 yield and n were determined by Equations (3) and (4)\n(3)\n(4)\nin which ID is the disk current density, IR is the ring current density and N is the current collection efficiency of the Pt ring. N was evaluated to be 0.36 from the reduction of [K3Fe(CN)6].\nAcknowledgements\nWe are grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21371023, 21322107, 21471089, 21231005).\nSupporting Information\nReferences"
}